ID: 9	RANK: 95	SCORE: 8.1494

<DOC>
<DOCNO> FBIS4-53720 </DOCNO>
<HT>    "dreas099_d_94018" </HT>


<HEADER>
<AU>   FBIS-EAS-94-099 </AU>
Daily Report 
<DATE1>  3 Apr 1994 </DATE1>

</HEADER>

<F P=100> South Korea </F>
<H3> <TI>   * Scenarios for Unification, DPRK Reform </TI></H3>
<HT><F P=107><PHRASE>    * Scenarios for Unification, DPRK Reform </PHRASE></F></HT>
<H4>    * DPRK Seeks U.S. Normalization </H4>

<F P=102> 942C0111A Seoul IRYO SINMUN in Korean 3 Apr 94 p 1 </F>
<F P=103> 942C0111A </F>
<F P=104>  Seoul IRYO SINMUN </F>
<F P=105>  Korean </F>


<TEXT>
CSO 

<F P=106> [By reporter Chong Son-kyo] </F>
  [Text] "These days Pyongyang residents of the middle school 
age or older each carry an empty explosives satchel strapped 
around their waist, in a show of their horrifying determination 
to throw their bodies with the satchels filled with shells when 
there is a call from the leader. In addition, copies of a war 
map of South Korea with marked targets of initial attack in the 
event of war have been distributed." So said a Chinese source 
who recently visited North Korea. 
  Meanwhile, a Japanese source said, "These days a nightly 
blackout from 2100 hours is in force in Pyongyang, even in 
hotels for foreigners, turning the city into pitch darkness." 
  A Korean paper in the United States carries a similar 
report: 
"The foremost subject among taxi passengers in Seoul is, `What 
would happen if war breaks out?' There is a growing tendency 
among Korean residents in the United States to restrain their 
trips to the homeland. That is why an increasing number of them 
telephone their relatives in Korea more frequently." 
  Those are examples of the reports pouring in about the war 
atmosphere in the North and South since North Korea issued a 
threat to "turn South Korea into a sea of blood." The situation 
as described by these reports is really dreadful. However, 
interestingly enough, contrary to this reported atmosphere, 
arguments that "the war atmosphere has been concocted by tacit 
agreement between North Korea and the United States to pursue 
their own interests" have mushroomed with some credibility. 
According to this theory, the North Korean statement that it 
will "not hesitate to go to war" is hollow, and the U.S. 
"strategy of punishment" is closely linked to U.S. interests. 
  In a word, according to this theory, war cannot break out 
now. 
  The formula tacitly agreed to by North Korea and the United 
States is a win-and-win strategy. By this formula, both sides 
will win. To be more specific, by creating tension on the 
Korean Peninsula the United States seeks to sell Patriot 
missiles and other follow-up weapons, and North Korea seeks to 
settle the issue of establishing diplomatic relations with the 
United States. 
  North Korea has obstructed nuclear inspections, aborted the 
proposed exchange of special envoys between North and South, 
and used "the sea of blood" threat as a trump card at the 
formal negotiating table--all this was part of a prearranged 
strategy aimed at establishing diplomatic relations with the 
United States and even extracting U.S. economic aid. 
  If North Korea really wanted war, it would not have openly 
stated that it would "not hesitate to go to war." But it is a 
fact that Kim Chong- il, who commands nuclear diplomacy at the 
top, gained something from that threat. First, he has succeeded 
in controlling the military by placing North Korea on a quasi 
war-footing, thereby consolidating his power. Next, he has 
given the North Korean people the impression that "Kim 
Chong-il's outstanding judgment of the situation is producing 
diplomatic benefits." In addition, by causing uneasiness among 
the South Korean people, Kim Chong-il has gained the upper hand 
in diplomatic-psychological warfare. 
  Said a Korean journalist in the United States atuned to the 
North Korean situation: "North-South relations will get worse 
in late April and early May, but I think that North-South 
dialogue will be resumed in August or thereabouts as North 
Korea is expected to show an unexpected foreign policy trump 
card and make a sudden policy about-face." 
  That is the speculation about the possibility of 
"establishing diplomatic relations and exchanging ambassadors 
between North Korea and the United States in August." Various 
indications supporting this speculation are actually surfacing. 
Some of the Korean residents in the United States who recently 
visited North Korea are establishing a "prearranged channel of 
contact" with Kim Chong-il. A Korean newspaper in the United 
States has come out with a "slogan in praise of Kim Chong-il" 
on the basis of the judgment that "North Korea and the United 
States will soon establish diplomatic relations in one way or 
another." 
  As if substantiating speculation about the early 
establishment of diplomatic relations, a high-ranking U.S. 
official on 26 March hinted at the possibility of resuming 
talks between the United States and North Korea. At a press 
conference held in the United States, the senior U.S. official 
who took part in the first and second rounds of U.S.-North 
Korea talks made this point: "I cannot specify the date, but 
the United States will soon resume talks with North Korea. U.N. 
sanctions against North Korea are not a policy goal of the 
United States at all. North Korea should accept the win-and-win 
formula. North Korea has obstructed inspections in order to 
squeeze more out of the bargain. But it was a failure." 
  The creation of mutually beneficial tension by the United 
States and North Korea has something to do with Clinton's and 
Kim Chong-il's current position. Currently, Clinton is beset by 
Whitewater, which is no less troublesome than Nixon's Watergate. 
Moreover, the only way to rescue the Patriot missile maker from 
the verge of bankruptcy is to sell the missiles in the world 
market. Some point out that the party pressuring the 
manufacturer and Clinton is the Kennedy family, which has close 
ties with Clinton. 
  On the other hand, Kim Chong-il wants to be in the 
international limelight as "an able diplomat" by wresting 
diplomatic recognition from the United States and arrogate the 
credit to himself. North Korea has quietly moved to turn over 
the remains of American soldiers to the U.S. side since last 
year. In an unexpected show of generosity toward the United 
States in humanitarian matters, North Korea has already returned 
a considerable number of bodies. 
  Since the latter half of 1993, North Korea has exerted 
efforts to open up to the outside world and promote economic 
cooperation. It is worthy of note that North Korea recently 
revised the joint venture law for the first time in 10 years 
and that a move is afoot to enact a law related to foreign 
investment. 

</TEXT>

</DOC>
