ID: 71	RANK: 11	SCORE: 23.0326

<DOC>
<DOCNO> FBIS3-54036 </DOCNO>
<HT>    "drnes015_p_94002" </HT>


<HEADER>
<AU>   FBIS-NES-94-015 </AU>
Document Type:Daily Report 
<DATE1>  25 Jan 1994 </DATE1>

</HEADER>

<F P=100> SOUTH ASIA </F>
<F P=101> Afghanistan </F>
<H3> <TI>   Rabbani Addresses Nation on Failed Coup d'Etat </TI></H3>
<F P=102>  LD2301195394 Kabul Radio Afghanistan Network in Pashto 1530 
GMT 23 Jan 94 </F>

<F P=103> LD2301195394 </F>
<F P=104>  Kabul Radio Afghanistan Network </F>


<TEXT>
Language: <F P=105> Pashto </F>
Article Type:BFN 

<F P=106> ["Message" from President Borhanoddin Rabbani; place and </F>
date not given--recorded] 
  [Text] [Announcer] Dear listeners of radio Afghanistan, 
esteemed Professor Borhanoddin Rabbani, president of the Islamic 
state of Afghanistan, presents a radio and television [as heard] 
message concerning the shameful and failed coup d'etat by the 
Globoddin-Karmal-Dostam satanic triangle and the victory of the 
Islamic army forces: 
  [Rabbani, in Dari] In the name of God, the merciful, the 
compassionate: Praise be upon the pure souls of dear martyrs of 
our beloved country and peace be upon the persecuted and heroic 
nation of Afghanistan, and in particular the noble citizens of 
bloody Kabul, who have witnessed grave pains and catastrophe 
prior to the victory, particularly after the victory of Jihad. 
  Faithful compatriots, the recent treacherous coup d'etat is 
the continuation of a series of consistent crimes that have been 
shaped by the enemies of Islam and our dear homeland outside the 
country's borders and that have been implemented one by one by 
treacherous elements and merciless murderers, the sworn enemies 
of our nation. The defeat of this bloody conspiracy along with 
its broad external and internal dimensions, is a gigantic 
victory and a historic deed by self-sacrificing heroic mojahedin 
and the wisdom of our new Islamic army. I congratulate the 
faithful nation and brave mojahedin, who with unprecedented 
courage stand in the trenches defending the soil of Islam and 
their homeland, on this great victory. I express thanks and 
gratitude to all leaders, the knowledgeable ulema, and dear 
commanders who have played a historic role in the defeat of this 
bloody coup d'etat and have supported the Islamic state. I 
sincerely thank all the people of Kabul, who have welcomed 
refugees from the affected areas; the state's services 
commission; the Red Crescent; the International Red Cross; and 
doctors and hospital personnel, who, with courage and sympathy, 
have rendered services to the wounded, the disabled, and 
refugees. 
  The Islamic state, while determined to uproot the reasons 
for 
the country's lack of stability in line with the wishes of the 
people, [words indistinct] to violate shamefully the life, 
property, and honor of the people, is ready to end the war with 
the Hezb-e Eslami [Islamic Party of Afghanistan], which 
Hekmatyar, contrary to the will of its center of decision-making 
and contrary to the will of its commanders, has unilaterally 
participated in this bloody catastrophe. We believe the members 
of Hezb-e Eslami are never desirous of war against their 
colleagues-in-one-trench and mojahedin in the Islamic state. In 
particular, after the recent conspiracy, no one in the Hezb-e 
Eslami wants to stand against the [word indistinct] of faithful 
mojahedin in the Islamic state and against the whole nation and 
to be apparently those whose swords are with Yazid [person who 
killed Prophet Mohammad's grandson Husayn in Karbala'] and their 
hearts with Hosayn. 
  However, as far as it depends on the militia, the purging of 
professional murderers and the centers of corruption and 
savagery will continue until they surrender their weapons to the 
Afghan nation. 
  The Islamic state warmly welcomes the sympathetic efforts of 
leaders of the fraternal countries: Saudi Arabia, Pakistan, the 
Islamic Republic of Iran, the ICO [Islamic Conference 
Organization] foreign ministers conference, and the UN, who are 
making efforts toward the establishment of security and putting 
an end to bloodshed in Afghanistan. Special envoys of the 
Islamic state of Afghanistan have met and discussed this matter 
with the leaders of the fraternal countries, Pakistan and Saudi 
Arabia. A delegation will be sent soon to Tehran to gain the 
cooperation of this fraternal neighboring country in solving our 
problems, while thanking it for its goodwill efforts. 
  In the meantime the state sincerely welcomes all esteemed 
circles in the country who are making efforts toward peace. We 
hope their efforts bear fruit. 
  Concerning political changes in the country's future, this 
point should not be left unsaid: The Islamic state never allows 
conspirators to target the destiny of this nation for their 
sinister aims through killing and murder. The people have 
determined their political destiny through their presence within 
the Resolution and Settlement Council [Shra-e Hal wa 'Aqd]. We 
again give the right to the nation's representatives to appoint 
their future leadership through a gathering or elections in line 
with the country's special conditions. 
  We invite the ICO and UN representatives to take part in and 
help us with the process of elections or any other process our 
people choose. Peace be upon you. God be with you. 

</TEXT>

</DOC>
