ID: 12	RANK: 3	SCORE: 23.4835

<DOC>
<DOCNO> FBIS4-4316 </DOCNO>
<HT>    "dreas062_j_94002" </HT>


<HEADER>
<AU>   FBIS-EAS-94-062 </AU>
Daily Report 
<DATE1>  29 Jan 1994 </DATE1>

</HEADER>

<F P=100> Indonesia </F>
<H3> <TI>   * More Talks on Island Dispute With Malaysia </TI></H3>
<HT><F P=107><PHRASE>    * More Talks on Island Dispute With Malaysia </PHRASE></F></HT>

<F P=102>   94SE0072B Jakarta KOMPAS in Indonesian 29 Jan 94 p 9 </F>
<F P=103> 94SE0072B </F>
<F P=104>  Jakarta KOMPAS </F>
<F P=105>  Indonesian </F>


<TEXT>
CSO 

  [Text] Talks about the Indonesian-Malaysian dispute over 
the Sipadan-Ligitan Islands have registered new results. For the 
first time, the second meeting of the Joint Working Group (JWG) 
approved the issuance of a joint statement saying, among other 
things, that a third JWG meeting would take place in Indonesia 
in May. It was revealed in the joint statement that the two 
sides had agreed to solve the dispute on the basis of 
international legal principles. "Included are relevant treaties, 
conventions, and understandings which involve the two sides," 
the statement said. 
  According to a report filed from Kuala Lumpur by KOMPAS 
reporter Budiarto Shambazy, the second meeting was still 
dominated by a process of "reciprocal legal testing," i.e., 
claiming Sipadan-Ligitan through the study of various documents. 
By studying discussions of this type, it would seem that future 
discussions will also continue at the level of an exchange of 
documents and of each side's response to the legal evidence 
presented. 
  In fact, the two sides are still discussing--or in the 
spirit 
of ASEAN "consulting"--scores of documents to strengthen their 
claim of sovereignty over Sipadan-Ligitan. There is still no 
absolute certainty over who really has the rights to 
Sipadan-Ligitan, even though de facto Malaysia occupies Sipadan 
Island and has developed tourism there. 
  At this second meeting Malaysia offered its responses or 
answers to the legal claims presented by Indonesia at the first 
meeting held in Jakarta in 1992. After this meeting in Kuala 
Lumpur, Malaysia will be seeking additional documentation to be 
presented at the third meeting to be held in Indonesia in May. 
  "We submitted (the documents) in 1992 and we're only getting 
an answer now. Of course they're looking for additional 
documents to strengthen their position. We are also looking for 
new documents to strengthen (our claim)," said Izhar Ibrahim, 
delegation chairman (political director general of the 
Department of Foreign Affairs), who was accompanied by Hasyim 
Djalal, deputy chairman of the delegation. 
  Neither of the two chairmen was willing to reveal what is in 
the documents, estimated to be more than 50 in number, presented 
by the two sides to legitimate their rights to Sipadan-Ligitan. 
Both Izhar and the Chairman of the Malaysian Delegation Kamil 
Jaafar (secretary general of the Department of Foreign Affairs) 
repeatedly said that it was too soon to reveal what is in the 
documents. 
  "We have made every effort and we have reached the maximum 
possible results, especially since we have agreed on a joint 
press statement. This is as far we progressed at this meeting. 
Each side has also presented a number of new documents, treaties 
and arguments to strengthen its claim for sovereignty over 
Sipadan-Ligitan," said Izhar. 
  In broad outline, Indonesia considers that Sipadan-Ligitan 
is 
within the area of national sovereignty because it was within 
the area under Dutch colonial control. Whereas Malaysia believes 
that the Dutch handed the two islands over to the British, who 
colonized Malaysia. Each side's claim is also based on where the 
border is drawn in the area, about which there is a difference 
of interpretation. 
  Based on a 1969 agreement, the two countries agreed, but did 
not sign a written agreement, to the principle of the status quo 
of the two islands. The dispute arose when Malaysia violated the 
status quo by building tourist facilities under private 
management on Sipadan Island. 
  According to several KOMPAS sources, Indonesia has actually 
requested that the dispute be settled through the International 
Court. But Malaysia disagreed with the idea of 
internationalizing the issue, preferring to carry out bilateral 
talks. 
  "(The talks) are bilateral; we're not thinking yet about 
internationalization," said Izhar, in response to questions 
about the "internationalization" of the dispute. 
  Another important result which Izhar said was also reached 
was an agreement to meet more often and to solve the dispute as 
quickly as possible. "Both sides want to solve this issue as 
quickly as possible. We will hold meetings more often," said 
Izhar. 
  Izhar gave an evasive reply to the question of whether the 
Indonesian delegation had reached its goal at the meetings this 
time. "I can't say we reached the goal, but we tried as hard as 
we could," he said. Referring to Indonesia's position at the end 
of the second meeting, Izhar said, "Of course we're in a 
stronger position. But I can't state what it is yet. We haven't 
finished collecting all the documents." 
  After the meetings were over, on Friday afternoon (28 
January) Minister of Foreign Affairs Ali Alatas took the 
opportunity to stop at Subang Airport (Kuala Lumpur) to listen 
to a report from the Indonesian delegation. Alatas received 
Izhar, Hasyim, Sudarmadi (the Indonesian ambassador in Kuala 
Lumpur) and several other delegates in the VIP room of the 
airport for an hour. 
  In the meantime, Minister of Foreign Affairs Ali Alatas told 
reporters at Sukarno-Hatta Airport on Friday (28 January) that 
the Sipadan-Ligitan dispute would not end in a dead-lock. Even 
though it has not yet moved beyond the stage of studying each 
other's data and documents, the two countries have agreed to 
solve the problem in an amicable way. He admitted that the 
problem requires expertise and time. Nevertheless, he said that 
Malaysia had presented its response to the dispute. 
  In response to questions from reporters, Alatas said that 
Malaysia had given its response. In order to discuss the 
dispute, on his trip from Yemen to Jakarta via Kuala Lumpur, 
Alatas received the response in the form of a report prepared by 
the Indonesian team, which is "battling" in Kuala Lumpur under 
the leadership of Drs Izhar Ibrahim, director general for 
political issues of the Department of Foreign Affairs. 
  He said that at the meeting in Kuala Lumpur Malaysia had 
handed over documents to strengthen their position on Sipadan 
and Ligitan. Indonesia did the same. Alatas said that at the 
meeting Malaysia had presented its response on the basis of the 
existing documents. However, the process will continue. In the 
near future, around May 1994, a high-level meeting (SOM) will 
take place. Alatas did not state Malaysia's response to 
Indonesia in a definite way. 
  In response to the steps that Malaysia has begun to take to 
occupy the two islands, Alatas emphasized that Indonesia and 
Malaysia have very friendly relations now. That is why steps 
that might invite a physical risk should not be taken. 
  "Should we send in our troops and throw them out? How could 
we do that, no way we can do that, we don't live in times like 
that any more, we're friends. We have many interests in common 
with Malaysia. This is a problem, and we're going to solve it, 
but in an amicable way. We're in ASEAN together," he asserted. 
  In response to a question about a possible solution to the 
Sipadan-Ligitan dispute, Alatas said that at this stage 
Indonesia and Malaysia had not yet moved away from studying the 
documentation and the Indonesian and Malaysian legal positions. 
This part of the process is not over yet and would continue. He 
said that Malaysia really has a different position on the issue 
and that is why we have to understand that Malaysia is 
presenting different documents. In this respect, Indonesia will 
continue to look into the best possible way to solve the problem. 
  At one point Malaysia, through Deputy Prime Minister Ghafar 
Baba (KOMPAS 23 December 1992) did ask Indonesia to relinquish 
its claim. He said that Indonesia will not lose anything if it 
gives up the two islands because it has thousands of other 
islands. However, on that occasion officials of the Department 
of Foreign Affairs said that it is not just a matter of an 
island but that it also involves national sovereignty. 

</TEXT>

</DOC>
