ID: 78	RANK: 48	SCORE: 8.6997

<DOC>
<DOCNO> FBIS4-31636 </DOCNO>
<HT>    "dreeu114_b_94002" </HT>


<HEADER>
<AU>   FBIS-EEU-94-114 </AU>
Daily Report 
<DATE1>  14 Jun 1994 </DATE1>

</HEADER>

<F P=100> BULGARIA </F>
<H3> <TI>   Videnov Defines BSP Political Line </TI></H3>
<HT><F P=107><PHRASE>    Videnov Defines BSP Political Line </PHRASE></F></HT>

<F P=102>   AU1306150594 </F>
<F P=103> AU1306150594 </F>
<F P=104></F>



<TEXT>
BFN 

    [Editorial Report] Sofia DUMA in Bulgarian on 4 June 
carries on pages 9 and 10 the text of the approximately 
12,000-word report that Zhan Videnov, chairman of the Supreme 
Council of the Bulgarian Socialist Party (BSP), delivered on the 
first day of the 41st BSP Congress in Sofia on 3 June. The 
report, which appears under the heading "Bulgaria Faces a New 
Choice," is "on the political line of the BSP." In his opening 
words, Videnov stresses that the aim of the 41st congress is "to 
initiate a new political line in the party's life -- a line of 
direct commitment of the Socialists to solving the immense 
problems facing Bulgarian society." 
  In his introduction, having noted the unexpected 
difficulties 
of the transition to democracy, Videnov says that "our society 
today faces a new choice: either to allow the present 
uncontrolled state of economic anarchy, rising corruption, and 
gross violation of the law to continue" or "to restore the 
manageability of the economy in combination with the principles 
of free economic initiative." He reiterates the BSP's support 
of the reforms, but says that the strategy followed so far has 
been erroneous, as it was "based on civil confrontation," for 
which the Union of Democratic Forces (SDS) carries most of the 
blame. 
  In the first main section of his report, under the 
subheading 
"The BSP in the Institutions of Power," Videnov briefly reviews 
the political developments in the period since the 40th BSP 
Congress in 1991, which began by the SDS and Rights and Freedoms 
Movement (DPS) imposing "an extremist formula of government," 
with the "new SDS nomenklatura" implementing "a 
restorational, repressive, and revanchist policy in parliament, 
the government, the Presidency, local government, the judiciary, 
and the media." This prompted the BSP, "not without certain 
hesitations," to support the Berov nonparty government of 
experts. He admits that the Berov administration has achieved 
only partial success in implementing the reforms, but stresses 
that it "proved sufficiently strong in parliament (and chiefly 
in society) to oppose with a solid majority the SDS claims for 
confrontational, monopolist power based on force." 
  Videnov then turns to the economic crisis, giving figures on 
the drastic fall in production in all spheres since 1989, 
accompanied by falling living standards and inevitable social 
tension. He asks how the social cost of the transition can be 
made bearable for the population and whether "the lost of public 
support for the reforms can be overcome." In seeking answers, 
he states six "principled conclusions and lessons": First, "any 
reform program in the socioeconomic sphere is doomed to failure 
without broad public support"; second, "the sharp political 
confrontation and primitive politicizing of economic problems 
paralyze the work of the institutions and block the necessary 
structural changes"; third, the crisis cannot be resolved 
"through measures of a monetary nature, especially in shock 
form"; fourth, the transition from a centralized to a market 
economy must be carried out "gradually and following the 
principle of continuity"; fifth, during the crisis, when most 
property and means of production are still state owned, "the 
state cannot abdicate from its obligation to regulate and adjust 
the economic processes"; and sixth, "the entire potential of the 
nation must be mobilized to find a new philosophy for the 
economic reform, one most suited to the specific conditions in 
Bulgaria." However, Videnov fails to propose any specific 
solutions to the current economic problems, confining himself to 
generalities such as: "Without a clear strategy for 
restructuring a considerable number of large enterprises that 
will remain in state ownership in the future, it is impossible 
to successfully privatize the rest." 
  In the next section of his report, subheaded "The Present 
Political Crisis and Its Solution Through Elections," the BSP 
leader reviews the party's consistent attempts to seek political 
dialogue with other parties to agree on "urgently required 
measures in the socioeconomic sphere." However, he admits that 
the attempts of the BSP and Prime Minister Berov to reach such 
an agreement between the parliamentary groups have been 
rebuffed. Accordingly, Videnov states, "the BSP Supreme Council 
has decided to turn to you, the delegates to the 41st BSP 
Congress, with the proposal that you should direct the 
activities of the BSP toward holding early parliamentary 
elections in October or November this year, so as to realize a 
major change in the method of implementing the transition in 
Bulgaria." He assures the delegates that the elections will 
mean "the rejection of the shock model for the transition, a 
clear left-of-center future for Bulgaria... and a clearly 
defined political configuration capable of giving Bulgaria the 
competent, stable, efficient, government of dialogue that it 
needs." Although he admits that to press for early elections 
involves certain risks for the BSP, he sees no other solution to 
the present political impasse in parliament. He adds that "this 
conclusion is also imposed by the grave political situation in 
the country, for which homegrown politickers and wheeler-dealers 
are to blame." He notes that many of those who have caused the 
crisis "are accumulating dirty financial and political dividends 
from the difficulties of the crisis." Finally, Videnov sees 
elections as the way to avoid "additional severe socioeconomic 
risks -- hyperinflation, devaluation of the lev, series of 
bankruptcies, and the failure of the budget." 
  Videnov then proceeds to propose "a change in the model for 
the transition." He points out that "the people have every 
reason to insist that the social cost of the transition is 
bearable" and that "a strong modern left party is needed to 
ensure this." In contrast, "the Bulgarian right wing today is 
dominated by radical trends that, under the guise of 
ultraliberal slogans, are imposing restorational, authoritarian, 
and anarchistic views of the transition." 
  In the section of his report subheaded "On a New 
Socioeconomic Policy," Videnov first reiterates that "the BSP 
supports building a democratic society based on a social market 
economy." He then lists the main points in the Socialists' 
socioeconomic program: 
  First, "Bulgarian production is top priority"; 
  Second, "acceleration of the privatization process," 
promoting "shareholding forms of market privatization, which 
presupposes the speedy consolidation and development of the 
exchange markets in securities," including promoting "the 
purchase of enterprises by workers' collectives," in addition to 
"the existing preferences accorded to employees in enterprises 
undergoing privatization"; 
  Third, "realism in agrarian policy," combating the 
fragmentation of farmland ownership by encouraging the formation 
of "voluntarily organized cooperatives, and following the 
worldwide practice of subsidizing agricultural production to 
maintain its viability"; 
  Fourth, "financial and foreign exchange stabilization," with 
emphasis placed "on increasing budget expenditure on direct 
investments and preferences for private entrepreneurs with a 
view to promoting eventual rises in budget revenue," "finally 
settling the problem of enterprises bad debts," and avoiding 
"the present tendency to increasingly tie up our financial 
balances by taking new loans from foreign sources"; and 
  Fifth, "an export orientation of the Bulgarian economy and 
achieving a positive balance of trade," by such measures as 
"moderate and selective protectionism of our internal market" to 
give producers the necessary breathing space to become 
competitive in the world market; Videnov points out that foreign 
capital, though welcome, "can play only an ancillary role and 
will come to Bulgaria only when the market situation in Bulgaria 
guarantees sufficient profitability." 
  In the section on social policy, Videnov attacks the "shock 
therapy and the liberal model of the reform that is completely 
inadequate for Bulgaria and has reduced most of society to 
poverty." He says that "the state is called upon to make 
adjustments to the market mechanisms... to guarantee a certain 
distribution and redistribution of the national income." He 
advocates measures against "the price speculation that is 
greatly contributing to the decline in the population's 
purchasing power." The BSP's "active investment policy will 
help to create new jobs in all spheres," Videnov says. He also 
promises proper compensation for pensioners and supports the 
establishment of independent pension funds and help for families 
and children. 
  The next section of the report is entitled "The Political 
System of Society -- Toward Restoration or Modernization?" 
Videnov notes that "for Bulgaria, the `velvet resolution' of 
1989 proved to be a step backward because it returned the 
country to the doomed confrontational models of the past." 
"Today," he says, "most Bulgarian parties consist of coteries 
without a social basis that are not representative and have no 
sense of responsibility." Videnov claims that the political 
system should include the following seven elements: "social 
democracy as the basis of the new politics"; "decentralization 
and self-government"; "socialization in economic life," 
including "a decisive decentralization of ownership sand its 
just distribution and social privatization" that "puts a great 
part of the social production funds in the hands of their 
creators"; following a "responsible left policy" to prevent the 
risk of the restoration of authoritarianism; "a radical reform 
of the legal system"; "democratization of the media"; and equal 
social access to culture. 
  In the section entitled "BSP -- a New Party," Videnov 
considers the changes that have occurred and are still taking 
place in the BSP. He summarizes the main ideas that now guide 
the party activities as follows: 
  1. "The BSP does not regard power as an aim in itself but as 
a means for developing a free, just, and cohesive society." 
Videnov claims that the Socialists realize that "power does not 
oppose the civic society but supports its manifestations and 
protects the social, intellectual, and economic autonomy of the 
individual...." 
  2. The BSP is a firm supporter of the parliamentary system, 
and its "indisputable feature is deep respect for the 
Constitution and the laws, its political partners and opponents, 
and readiness to conduct an open and equal dialogue with all 
political formations...." 
  3. The BSP remains a party of the masses. 
  4. Replacement of leaders. Videnov draws attention to "the 
complete replacement of leading figures in the BSP in recent 
years, and the radical renewal of the leading organs, ranging 
from the municipal organizations to the Supreme Council." 
  5. Democratization of the BSP. Videnov claims that "the BSP 
today can convincingly be assessed as a party with developed and 
expanding democratic principles within itself and as a party of 
active pluralism of ideas." 
  In the penultimate section of his report, Videnov dwells at 
length on the continuous intense ideological debate that has 
taken place within the party since the 40th congress, claiming 
that it serves as proof of the party's vitality and democratic 
nature and noting that despite sharp debates on the various 
draft versions of the new BSP program, the party has managed to 
preserve its unity. 
  In conclusion, Videnov notes that "in the face of the 
antisocialist propaganda campaign, relying on insinuations, 
lies, and manipulations, the BSP counters by offering its own 
honest analysis and sincere desire for change." He calls upon 
the party "before the crucial elections, to strive to develop 
its potential for social dialogue." "We have the moral 
strength," he says, "and we have political grounds to seek a new 
public vote of confidence, so as to assume our national 
responsibilities." 

</TEXT>

</DOC>
