ID: 56	RANK: 61	SCORE: 14.9011

<DOC>
<DOCNO> FBIS4-20338 </DOCNO>
<HT>    "jpcar022___94018" </HT>


<HEADER>
<AU>   JPRS-CAR-94-022 </AU>
JPRS 
China 

<DATE1>  8 January 1994 </DATE1>

</HEADER>

<F P=100> MILITARY, PUBLIC SECURITY </F>
<H3> <TI>   Preparedness for High-Tech Naval Warfare Stressed </TI></H3>
<HT><F P=107><PHRASE>    Preparedness for High-Tech Naval Warfare Stressed </PHRASE></F></HT>

<F P=102>   94CM0177A Beijing JIANCHUAN ZHISHI [NAVAL AND MERCHANT 
SHIPS] in Chinese No 1, 8 Jan 94 pp 2-3 </F>

<F P=103> 94CM0177A </F>
<F P=104>  Beijing JIANCHUAN ZHISHI [NAVAL AND MERCHANT 
SHIPS] </F>

<F P=105>  Chinese </F>


<TEXT>
CSO 

<F P=106> [Article by Vice Admiral Fang Qiang (2455 1730): "Need for </F>
High Technology Orientation in Building the Navy"] 
  [Excerpts] Editor's Note: Thanks to the 
energetic support of Navy comrades concerned, this magazine has 
invited several old Navy admirals to write some articles for it. 
Even though these old admirals are advanced in years, when they 
speak of the work they have done in building the Navy and their 
future hopes for the Navy, they are filled with deep feelings. 
They provide a very good window whereby readers can gain a 
further understanding of progress in developing the Navy. 
[passage omitted] 
<H5>  Need To Face Squarely the Ever-Changing International </H5>
Situation 
  Since the late 1980s, the international situation has 
changed 
very rapidly. One might say that this has been the most complex, 
most unpredictable, and most tumultuous period since the end of 
World War II during which a series of unanticipated major events 
have taken place. This has included changes in Eastern Europe, 
the unification of the two Germanys, the Gulf War, the civil war 
in Yugoslavia, the dismemberment of the USSR, and the 
dissolution of the Warsaw Pact. International tensions have 
eased, dialogue has replaced confrontation, and peace and 
development have become the two main themes of the world today. 
Comrade Deng Xiaoping, who made a scientific judgment of the 
international situation and the trend of developments based on 
long observation and analysis, stated clearly that the increase 
in forces for peace is greater than the increase in forces for 
war. Although the danger of war exists, with good work, a world 
war may be postponed. The winning of a long period of a peaceful 
environment is possible. The way in which the situation has 
developed completely confirms this scientific judgment of 
Comrade Deng Xiaoping. 
  The current international situation appears favorable for 
China's development. Nevertheless, some disputes between China 
and some surrounding nations about territorial sovereignty and 
maritime rights and interests remain basically unresolved. 
Differences and disputes will go on for a long time, and may 
possibly intensify somewhat under certain circumstances. As the 
international situation constantly changes, the possibility that 
limited naval warfare will occur cannot be ruled out, first 
because of hegemonistic aggression, expansion, and provocations; 
second, in order to recover island reefs that the enemy 
occupies; and third, to contest marine economic rights. With the 
development of high technology, a series of high and new 
technologies such as nuclear energy, electronic computers, 
spaceflight, microelectronics, automation, and new materials 
have irresistably surged into the navy military realm, and have 
been translated into weapons and equipment. Therefore, in order 
to meet the constantly changing international situation, the 
focus of the Chinese navy must be on modern technology, 
particularly on preparing for limited wars at sea in which high 
technology will be used. 
<H5>  Need for a High Technology Orientation in Building the Navy </H5>
  Jiang Zemin, chairman of the Central Military Affairs 
Committee, Deputy Chairman Liu Huaqing, and Deputy Chairman 
Zhang Zhen pay extremely close attention to the winning of a 
limited high technology war, and they put great emphasis on the 
study of how existing equipment may be used to defeat a better 
equipped enemy. We must inculcate confidence about daring to 
fight and being sure to win; and we must thoroughly understand 
and study the history of our military forces in using inferior 
equipment to triumph over enemies having superior equipment, and 
our Navy's history of daring to fight and holding fast 
tenaciously. We must be sure to maintain and develop these 
special strengths. 
  The position of naval forces in a high technology situation 
becomes more and more important. The achievements made in combat 
operations at sea in which naval forces play the main role and 
other service arms take part frequently exceed those of ordinary 
sea warfare. Should a military engagement suddenly occur at sea, 
we will unavoidably face the challenge of high technology 
limited ocean warfare. Practice has demonstrated that whoever 
possesses high technology will effectively control the combat 
area, will seize the combat initiative, and will carry out 
rapidly orchestrated attacks. In order to contain effectively 
outbreaks of limited warfare at sea, it is necessary to focus in 
peacetime on different goals and adopt different tactics in 
different environments to demonstrate the existence and the role 
of naval forces. This includes things such as conducting 
exercises and weapons tests at sea. Visits abroad of naval 
forces, regular naval forces exercises, forces deployments, 
build-ups in combat areas, and participation in scientific 
expeditions and marine surveys give pause to present and future 
enemies. They make enemies understand that they will have to pay 
an enormous price for any infringement of the sovereignty of our 
territorial sea and marine resources. Thus, such demonstrations 
play a deterrent role in containing limited wars at sea. Because 
each battle in a limited war at sea has a direct bearing on a 
nation's political and diplomatic battles, the outcome of 
military activities will have an extremely great effect 
internationally and domestically. 
  The Navy's "coastal defense" strategic policy requires 
understanding of trends of development in navy building, 
emphasis on advanced research, overall planning, long-range 
planning, greater development of large and medium size vessels 
suited to the development of China's navy, and making fullest 
use of the role of submarines and water mines, as well as 
torpedoes. Submarines are the main force employed in ocean 
sabotage and guerrilla warfare, and they are also one of the 
main forces in the conduct of mobile warfare at sea. Sea mines 
and torpedoes are conventional weapons, but they still are very 
potent under high technology warfare conditions. During several 
recent partial wars at sea, they played an astounding role. In 
high technology warfare, full use must be made of the role of 
technical personnel. We must use the training of our own 
personnel and the importation of others in combination. We must 
tap the knowledge of available talent and fully validate it to 
build our own large vessels to increase deterrent force. The 
Navy is a technology-intensive, human talent-intensive service 
army. Building the navy is a piece of complex systems 
engineering. Genuine building of a a complete naval combat 
capability requires attention to the building of systems to 
improve overall integration, and increase overall benefits from 
the building of the Navy. 

</TEXT>

</DOC>
