ID: 53	RANK: 54	SCORE: 24.4439

<DOC>
<DOCNO> FBIS4-11755 </DOCNO>
<HT>    "drnes063yy_94008" </HT>


<HEADER>
<AU>   FBIS-NES-94-063 </AU>
Daily Report 
<DATE1>  31 Mar 1994 </DATE1>

</HEADER>

<F P=100> INTERNATIONAL AFFAIRS </F>
<F P=101> Arab-Israeli Talks </F>
<H3> <TI>   Correspondents View Hebron Security Agreement </TI></H3>
<HT><F P=107><PHRASE>    Correspondents View Hebron Security Agreement </PHRASE></F></HT>

<F P=102>   TA3103132094 Tel Aviv IDF Radio in Hebrew 1230 GMT 31 Mar 94 </F>
<F P=103> TA3103132094 </F>
<F P=104>  Tel Aviv IDF Radio </F>
<F P=105>  Hebrew </F>


<TEXT>
BFN 

<F P=106> [Studio talk between anchorman 'Adi Talmor in Tel Aviv and </F>
correspondent Sefi Hendler in Cairo -- live] 
  [Text] [Talmor] The PLO and Israel signed an agreement on 
security arrangements for the Arab residents of Hebron a short 
while ago. This paves the way for the resumption of 
negotiations on Gaza-Jericho First. Our correspondent in Cairo 
Sefi Hendler attended the brief signing ceremony. Here is his 
report: 
  [Hendler] Good afternoon. After having become accustomed to 
the DOP -- the Declaration of Principles between Israel and the 
Palestinians -- we will now have to learn a new acronym, TIPH: 
Temporary International Presence in Hebron [acronym and 
preceding five words in English]. This is the name of the 
international force that will be composed of 160 soldiers from 
Norway, Denmark, and Italy. The agreement stipulates that these 
soldiers, who will have the status of civilian observers, will 
be permitted to carry personal handguns for self-defense 
purposes only. This force will deploy in Hebron for three 
months. If at the conclusion of this period, the Palestinians 
and Israelis are jointly interested in extending the observers' 
mandate, then this will be possible. The goals of the TIPH -- 
the international force to be deployed in Hebron -- are 
specified in the agreement, copies of which were handed out to 
correspondents a short time ago in Cairo. The goals are as 
follows: One, to give the Palestinians a sense of security. 
Two, to maintain stability in Hebron in order to guarantee the 
safety and wellbeing of local residents. Three, to supervise 
the efforts to restore the Palestinians' sense of security and 
to allow life to return to normal in Hebron. Four, to report on 
developments in Hebron to several bodies: first and foremost to 
a special Hebron committee which will be comprised of two 
representatives from each side, including the mayor of Hebron 
and the head of the Civil Administration in Hebron. The Hebron 
committee will report to a subcommittee which will be 
established within the framework of negotiations on the 
implementation of the Declaration of Principles. The United 
States and Russia, the cosponsors of the peace process, will 
also establish a committee that will be briefed by the 
multinational force deployed in Hebron. 
  The second part of today's agreement deals with the 
implementation of Gaza-Jericho First. It stipulates that the 
discussions on the implemention of Gaza-Jericho First will 
resume today. We understood that this constitutes a temporary, 
and not very significant piece of news which was only noted in 
order to prove that the negotiations on the implementation of 
Gaza-Jericho First would start today while the really practical 
discussions would begin next week, apparently in Cairo. The 
agreement also stipulates that the Israeli withdrawal from the 
Gaza Strip and Jericho will be accelerated and posits the early 
stationing of Palestinian policemen in the Gaza Strip by next 
week in order to give the Palestinians there a greater feeling 
of security and to further speed up the Israeli withdrawal. 
These are the details. The negotiations on Gaza-Jericho First 
will resume later today following the signing of the agreement 
on the security package in Hebron known as TIPH. This is the 
name of the international presence that will number 160 
personnel from Italy, Norway, and Denmark. 
  [Talmor] When will the negotiations on Gaza-Jericho First 
resume in a wider framework? 
  [Hendler] This is not mentioned in the agreement but we 
understand that this will take place next week, probably on 
Sunday or Monday [3 or 4 April] in Cairo. 

</TEXT>

</DOC>
