ID: 53	RANK: 73	SCORE: 23.5912

<DOC>
<DOCNO> FBIS4-60612 </DOCNO>
<HT>    "drnes102_l_94001" </HT>


<HEADER>
<AU>   FBIS-NES-94-102 </AU>
Daily Report 
<DATE1>  25 May 1994 </DATE1>

</HEADER>

<F P=100> ISRAEL </F>
<H3> <TI>   Rabin, Sources on PLO Violation of Agreement </TI></H3>
<HT><F P=107><PHRASE>    Rabin, Sources on PLO Violation of Agreement </PHRASE></F></HT>

<F P=102>   TA2505155594 Tel Aviv IDF Radio in Hebrew 1400 GMT 25 May 94 </F>
<F P=103> TA2505155594 </F>
<F P=104>  Tel Aviv IDF Radio </F>
<F P=105>  Hebrew </F>


<TEXT>
BFN 

<F P=106> [Discussion between studio anchor Tamar Landau and political </F>
correspondent Udi Segal at Tel Aviv University -- live] 
  [Text] [Landau] A legal opinion presented to Prime 
Minister Yitzhaq Rabin today stipulates that if there is a grave 
violation of the accord with the PLO, the agreement is null and 
void. If relatively minor violations occur, Israel may impose 
sanctions such as closing off the Autonomy areas and canceling 
the safe passages from Gaza to Jericho. Udi Segal has more 
details: 
  [Segal] Senior security officials said today they believe 
that the Palestinian authority wishes to prove it is able to 
control the territory and -- according to estimates by the 
Palestinian police -- if it wanted to, it could foil many terror 
acts. At the same time, the senior security sources made clear 
that if the Palestinians fail to provide security, Israel will 
have to do this itself. The remarks were made to reporters in a 
meeting with the media to explain the various aspects of the 
Gaza and Jericho agreement. On the one hand, the sources 
present a positive picture: We have a partner for dialogue, 
they say. The activists in the field show that they seriously 
mean to implement the agreement and prove their ability to do 
so. For example, the police units that arrived in Gaza show 
certain control abilities, and even their spic and span uniform 
shows a degree of authority and seriousness. 
  On the other hand, we heard a long and detailed briefing 
about the difficulties that outnumber the positive aspects. The 
sources mainly referred to the fact that there is no money on 
the ground, not even for salaries and so called everyday 
management. There is a shortage of food, gasoline, and other 
basics of logistic support means are lacking in both the 
activities of the Palestinian police and the civilian offices 
which were handed over to local directors. In the meantime, 
until 'Arafat appoints the Palestinian authority, there is no 
one to run the area. 
  [Jerusalem Qol Yisra'el in Hebrew at 1400 GMT on 25 May 
carries a similar report adding: "Our correspondent Shlomo Raz 
reports that in a meeting with correspondents, the sources said 
PLO leader Yasir 'Arafat has to change his decisionmaking 
process, otherwise shock waves can be expected in the 
organization's leadership. They said they do not believe him, 
but added that if they had to negotiate with the local 
leadership in the territories, things would have been much 
harder."] 
  Speaking before students today, Prime Minister Yitzhaq Rabin 
said that although the policemen are not receiving salaries, 
their performance is better than we had expected. They still do 
not fully understand their responsibilities or active duties, 
but we have a partner there. Some policemen there have been out 
of Gaza for the past 20 years, but their attitude is positive. 
Rabin then added: I am not referring to their chief chatterer, 
meaning 'Arafat. 
  Rabin addressed himself to 'Arafat's decree yesterday 
canceling military orders, saying violation or not, this is 
nonsense. His remarks are meaningless. 
  A legal opinion presented here today states that if the PLO 
significantly breaches [hafara mashma'utit] the agreement with 
Israel, the agreement would be null and void or, alternatively, 
Israel may announce it is suspending the agreement for as long 
as it wants. 
  [Landau] Does this condition apply to a reverse hypothetical 
situation in which Israel violates the agreement in some way? 
What is a gross violation [hafara hamura]? 
  [Segal] A gross violation means a breach of a clause without 
the existence of which the offended party would not have signed 
the agreement to begin with. That is to say that there may be 
insignificant violations of the agreement which, according to 
international law, apply to both parties. 'Arafat's acts over 
the past several days constitute insignificant violations of the 
agreement. According to international law, Israel may legally 
make a reciprocal violation that would equal the first 
violation. For example, Israel may make take such steps as 
banning the Palestinian residents of the Gaza Strip and Jericho 
from entering Israel; canceling the safe passages of 
Palestinians between Gaza and Jericho; avoid employing laborers 
in Israel; close the air space; or many other steps. 
  In the meeting, official analysts spoke about three tests 
'Arafat must face now: Providing the Palestinians with security 
-- that is the test of control. The need to unify enough 
Palestinian bodies to run daily life -- that is, making the 
civilian system, that is not yet working well, operational. The 
third, which is a precondition for the other two, is the ability 
to work with budgets, meaning collecting funds from two sources: 
taxes, and the sources doubt that they will be able to collect 
taxes at this time; and the international community which so far 
has not shown that it is willing to finance the autonomy's 
everyday life. 
  All the security officials who spoke here today said that it 
is too early to unequivocally determine whether the agreement is 
working or not. After all, these are the initial days. It will 
take a few more weeks before we are able to judge what is really 
happening in Tunis, Gaza, and Jericho. 
  [Jerusalem Qol Yisra'el in Hebrew at 1505 GMT carries a 
similar report by Shlomo Raz adding that in his meeting with 
reporters today, Prime Minister Rabin said that "he is worried 
that Jericho might become a focus of sharp confrontation, unless 
the orders of the Central Command commander are strictly 
observed." Rabin further said that the Israelis involved in the 
incidents yesterday "were not exactly naive." Rabin said that 
Kibbutz Netzarim in the Gaza Strip was evacuated by the 
Religious Kibbutz Movement "in a big rush, and they even asked 
for 3 million shekels, and received the money." The place was 
later inhabited by Gush Emunim activists, but "if this is a real 
settlement, I'll be damned." Raz goes on to say that "in his 
address today, Rabin elaborated on his expectations from the 
agreement with the PLO. Anyone who portrays the agreement of 
principles as peace is wrong. It is a major step toward peace, 
but it is not peace." "'Arafat lacks experience in the conduct 
of a community's everyday life or in managing budgets, and he 
has no desire to do so, Rabin stressed. The Palestinian 
policemen are already suffering from this: they have no 
salaries, food, or logistics syupport for their activities. At 
the same time, Rabin pointed out, their attitude so far has been 
positive. It is also positive that the policemen came from 
Iraq, Sudan, and Algiers and did not experience the intifadah, 
thus they do not feel hatred toward us as the Palestinians in 
the territories do."] 

</TEXT>

</DOC>
