ID: 49	RANK: 98	SCORE: 15.6518

<DOC>
<DOCNO> FBIS3-22274 </DOCNO>
<HT>    "jpten007___94001" </HT>


<HEADER>
<AU>   JPRS-TEN-94-007 </AU>
Document Type:JPRS 
Document Title:Environmental Issues 

<DATE1>  15 March 1994 </DATE1>

</HEADER>

<F P=100> AFRICA </F>
<F P=101> REGIONAL AFFAIRS </F>
<H3> <TI>   Environmental Report Roundup 24 Jan-12 Feb </TI></H3>
<F P=102>  AB1302223794 </F>
<F P=103> AB1302223794 </F>
<F P=104></F>



<TEXT>
Article   Type:BFN 

  [Editorial Report] The following is a roundup of recent 
environmental reports monitored from media in FBIS Abidjan 
Bureau and EAU coverage areas from 24 January to 7 February. 
  GHANA 
  Accra Ghana Broadcasting Corporation Radio Network in 
English 
at 2000 GMT on 24 January reports that a four-day international 
seminar on forest land use, its conflicts and solutions in Ghana 
and Africa, is under way in Kumasi. It is being organized by 
the British Council in conjunction with the Ministries of 
Environment and Land and Forestry as well as some associations. 
According to a world report on environment "17 million hectares 
of tropical forests are lost every year, while in Ghana a 
considerable amount of the country's forest is lost." This is 
due to the continued demand for new agricultural land for food 
and cash crops, the excessive logging and the high incidence of 
uncontrolable bush fire. 
  Accra Ghana Broadcasting Corporation Radio Network in 
English 
at 2000 GMT on 25 January reports that the Ofinso District 
agro-forestry officer recently advised farmers there to take 
agro-forestry seriously in order to help prevent soil erosion 
and replenish its fertility. The announcer says that the 
officer, who was speaking after a training trip organized for 25 
farmers, also "advised them to control the spread of bush fires 
and to stop the illegal burning of forest." The announcer 
further says that at Cape Coast, the Central Regional forestry 
officer " called for police protection and cooperation to stop 
the illegal felling of trees by some timber contractors and 
chainsaw operators in the region." 
  Accra Ghana Broadcasting Corporation Radio Network in 
English 
at 1300 GMT on 2 February reports that about 40 representatives 
of member churches of the Christian Council of Ghana have begun 
a five-day workshop in Accra to evolve strategies to tackle 
issues of development and environment. The workshop will be 
followed by another in the north, culminating in a national one 
on the role of the Churches in national development. A 
consultant to the Christian Council, who opened the workshop 
say: "The churches can play a meaning role in development if 
they have a sound economic base." The director of development 
and environment department of the Christian Council of Ghana 
say: "The time has come for the churches to pay greater 
attention to environmental degradation." 
  KENYA 
  Nairobi KNA in English at 1700 GMT on 1 February in a 
Nairobi-datelined item reports the Kenya Government will not 
implement the second phase of the Kenya Indigenous Forests 
Conservation (KIFCON) program funded by the ODA [expansion 
unknown] because three out of the 11 conditions attached to the 
renewal of the phase were unacceptable to the government. 
  Minister John Sambu for environment and natural resources 
told a press conference in his office today that the insistance 
of KIFCON that forests should be managed by private 
organizations and NGOs was contrary to stipulations of the 
Forest Act Cap. 385 and the government could not bear with it. 
  Mr. Sambu said that the government would also not accept a 
suggestion that local communities be allowed to cultivate and 
graze their livestock in the forests as the activities were 
banned by the government in 1988 as a result of misuse. 
Restating the government's policy on conservation of forests, 
the minister said the government's forest conservation 
strategies over the years had been to sensitize the local 
community's attachment to the indigenous forest among other 
policies. 
  He maintained that the government welcomed support from 
donors with acceptable conditions and left the matter of KIFCON 
with ODA to reconsider its stand. Mr. Sambu further disclosed 
that out of 50.5 million shillings owed to the government by 
forest licencees by December 1992, 29 million shillings had been 
recovered by November last year (1993), following the 
government's threat to suspend their operations. He denied that 
the government intends to write off the debts as reported in the 
local press. 
  MALI 
  Bamako Radiodiffusion-Television du Mali Radio in French at 
2000 GMT on 26 January reports that the council of ministers met 
on 26 January and adopted a bill and a draft decree ratifying 
the convention on biologic diversity signed in Rio de Janeiro on 
12 June 1992. 
  NIGERIA 
  Paris AFP in English at 1409 GMT on 1 February in a Lagos- 
datelined item reports community representatives from Nigeria's 
southern Delta State have told a government committee of their 
fears of health risks arising from oil prospection and 
production, THE GUARDIAN newspaper reported on 1 February. 
  The alarm was raised Monday by delegates from the Urhobo, 
Isekiri and Ijaw communities at a meeting with a ministerial 
team set up by General Sani Abacha's military regime to look 
into their grievances. 
  The people of Delta state, the nation's largest producer of 
oil, have become exposed to the hazards of oil exploration and 
related activities by local and foreign companies, they said. 
The delegates added that most rivers in the region have been 
shown to be polluted with mercury and lead. "There is abundant 
evidence that the disease pattern of the Urhobo population has 
changed from the traditional malaria and pneumonia to diseases 
of the respiratory tract, central nervous system as well as 
blood system", one community leader stated. 
  High temperatures associated with gas flaring have killed 
local vegetation and rendered land unproductive for crops, they 
claimed. The communities have already complained about the 
unfair distribution of oil revenues, which contribute more than 
90 percent of Nigeria's annual income, the independent newspaper 
said. 
  The government team includes Don Etiebet, Alex Ibru and 
Melford Okilo, respectively ministers of petroleum resources, 
internal affairs and commerce, who are all from oil-producing 
southern states. 
  In protest at what they consider as political 
marginalisation, environmental damage and economic strangulation 
some residents of Delta State and neighbouring Rivers State have 
stopped some oil companies from operating and destroyed schools, 
hospitals and other buildings, a spokesman for one foreign oil 
company told AFP. 
  Dakar PANA in English at 1515 GMT on 7 February in a 
Lagos-datelined item reports an international workshop on the 
environment and sustainable development opened here on 7 
February with participants urging an integrated solution to the 
global problem. 
  In a keynote address, Rasheed Saba, of Nigeria's Federal 
Environmental Protection Agency (FEPA), said that poverty, debt 
burden, and other problems facing the developing countries must 
be addressed for environmental protection to be meaningful. 
"Where a people are hungry, homeless and hopeless, you do not 
expect them to protect the environment," said Saba. 
  He called for a "multi-disciplinary process on education and 
environmental awareness at all levels", capacity-building in the 
developing nations, and a "bottom-up and participatory 
approach". The environmental expert warned that sustainable 
development should not be left at the mercy of economic 
indicators. 
  He urged the industrialised north to abandon their "wasteful 
consumption pattern." According to him, "25 percent of the 
world's rich consume close to 85 percent of the resources and 
produce some 90 percent of the waste". He said that "southern 
governments and their elites are their peoples worst enemies." 
  Maurice Sheridan of the U.K.-based Foundation for 
International Environmental Law and Development, FIELD, said the 
global endorsement of the Rio Declaration and other treaties 
should be backed by concrete action. The week-long workshop is 
being sponsored by the British Council in Nigeria and the 
Nigerian Institute of Advanced Legal Studies. Topics to be 
discussed include "Human Rights and the Environment", "Access to 
Environmental Justice", "Environmental Protection and the 
Transfer of Technology", and the "Role of NGO's in Achieving 
Sustainable Development". 
  Lagos Radio Nigeria Network in English at 0600 GMT on 27 
January reports that the Federal Government has announced the 
appointment of Dr. Evans Aina as the director general of the 
reformed Federal Environmental Protection Agency. A statement 
on the appointment was signed by the secretary to the government 
of the Federation, Alhaji Aminu Saleh. 
  Lagos Radio Nigeria Network in English at 1800 GMT on 1 
February reports that Alhaji Dabo Aliyu, administrator of Yobe 
State, has called for pedology assistance in tackling ecological 
problems. He made the appeal while receiving a team of military 
officers from the Commandant Staff College, Jaji, who were on 
study tour of the state. The administrator explained that the 
menace of environmental degradation affects the socioeconomic 
life of the people, adding that drought, desertification, and 
deforestation affect the agricultural production of the 
communities in the state. He also said that the damming 
activities in Bauchi, Kano, and Jigawa states have cost about 45 
percent of the water flow along River Yobe, adding that most of 
the lands cultivated for rice, wheat, and irrigation farming has 
been dried up. 
  Lagos Radio Nigeria Network in English at 0600 GMT 11 
February reports that Lieutenant Colonel Muhammed Onunka, 
military administrator of Edo State, has announced guidelines 
designed to sustain the exploitation of forest resources. He 
said at a meeting with saw millers in Benin-City that 
indiscriminate exploitation of forest resources was endangering 
the world famous species of trees. He announced that It is now 
mandatory for timber contractors to replenish cleared parts of 
the forests and to pay royalties directly to affected 
communities. 
  Lagos Voice of Nigeria in English at 1030 GMT 12 February 
announces that Alhaji Malam Adamu Ciroma, minister of 
agriculture and natural resources, has inaugurated a national 
advisory council and a technical committee to oversee the 
implementation of the tropical forests action program aimed at 
addressing the problems of deforestation in the country. 
Speaking at the ceremony in Abuja, Minister Ciroma stated that 
the problem of deforestation had become more poignant with the 
absence of a plan to replenish the forests. He said that the 
council would advise the government on the program, ensure 
commitment to its implementation, and establish interministerial 
or intersectorial mechanism at field level. 
  TANZANIA 
  Dar es Salaam Radio Tanzania Network in Swahili at 1300 GMT 
25 January reports John Malecela, the prime minister and first 
vice president, has stressed the government's stand that 
Tanzania has no agreement and will not enter into any agreement 
with any country making it a dump for toxic waste. 
  Responding to a supplementary question in Parliament, 
Malecela assured parliamentarians and citizens in general that 
the Government of Tanzania has not allowed and will not permit 
the country to be turned into a dump for such toxic waste. He 
asserted that to date there was no evidence whatsoever that such 
a situation had ever emerged in the country. Malecela said that 
if any MP or citizen could procure or had full evidence of entry 
of such waste into the country, he could present such claims to 
his office, and that it was not necessary to set up a committee 
to deal with the issue. 
  Earlier, it was alleged that a ship called (Felicia) which 
had anchored at the port of Dar es Salaam was carrying a cargo 
of toxic waste but it was subsequently proved that the ship was 
carrying explosives destined for Zambia and Mbeya in the 
southern part of the country, for use at the cement factory. 
  UGANDA 
  Dakar PANA in English at 1504 GMT on 2 February in a 
Kampala-datelined item states: "The water level in Lake 
Victoria, Africa's largest, dropped one meter in the month of 
January 1994, according to Water Development Department of the 
Ugandan Ministry of National Resources. The director of water 
development, Patrick Kahangire, attributed the drastic fall to 
prolonged droughts saying Uganda has not received enough rains 
in the last three years. He said water levels of major lakes in 
Uganda have dropped to their lowest for the last 30 years mainly 
because of insufficient rainfall. 
  Other lakes including Lake Kyoga in the middle of the 
country 
and Lake Wamala in the central region have also lost a lot of 
water over the same period. Kahangire was of the opinion that 
the current situation could be part of the meteorological cycle 
which repeats itself after a certain period characterised by 
short periods of heavy rainfall followed by years of drought 
during which lakes dry up. The manager of the wetland project, 
Paul Mafabi, recalled that Uganda experienced heavy rains in 
1923 followed by years of insufficient rains up to 1961. He 
said during that time the water levels on Uganda's lakes were 
very low until the heavy rains of 1962-63 raised the water 
levels. Since 1964, the lakes have been experiencing a downward 
trend in water levels, reaching lowest point in January, 
Kahangire said. Officials of the water development department 
and the Uganda Freshwater Research Organization (UFRO), agree 
that the presence of the water hyacinth on Ugandan lakes had 
accelerated loss of water from lakes through rapid evaporation. 
  The volume of water in the rivers flowing into some of the 
lakes had tremendously decreased and in some cases the rivers 
have dried up, they said. Kahangire said that a further fall in 
the water levels could affect Uganda's power generation at Jinja 
Dam, 80 kilometers east of Kampala, the berthing of ships and 
worsen the concentration of pollutants in the lakes. 
  Other sources said some water pumping stations in the 
country 
had started experiencing difficulties in pumping water because 
of the receding water line. 

</TEXT>

</DOC>
