ID: 81	RANK: 55	SCORE: 18.1129

<DOC>
<DOCNO> FBIS3-59841 </DOCNO>
<HT>    "jpnea001___94031" </HT>


<HEADER>
<AU>   JPRS-NEA-94-001 </AU>
Document Type:JPRS 
Document Title:Near East &amp; South Asia 

</HEADER>

<ABS> </ABS>
<DATE1>     6 January 1994 </DATE1>
<F P=100> NEAR EAST </F>
<F P=101> REPUBLIC OF YEMEN </F>
<H3> <TI>   Committee To Implement Cultural Agreement Formed </TI></H3>
<F P=102>  94LD0005B Doha AL-SHARQ in Arabic 1 Nov 93 p 3 </F>
<F P=103> 94LD0005B </F>
<F P=104>  Doha AL-SHARQ </F>


<TEXT>
Language: <F P=105> Arabic </F>
Article Type:CSO 

<F P=106> [Article by Muhammad al-'Ariqi: "During a Session of the </F>
Qatari-Yemeni Official Informational Talks: Formation of Joint 
Committee To Follow-Up on Implementation of the 
Informational-Cultural Agreement; Committee Holds its Meeting 
Next January in Doha"] 
  [Text] Sanaa-AL-SHARQ--Yesterday, Yemeni President 
Lieutenant General 'Ali 'Abdallah Salih received His Excelleny 
Dr. Hamad Bin-'Abd-al-'Aziz al-Kuwari, minister of information 
and culture and his accompanying delegation, who are on an 
official visit to Yemen. At the outset of the meeting, the 
minister conveyed the greetings of Amir Shaykh Khalifah 
Bin-Hamad Al Thani's and Crown Prince Shaykh Hamad Bin-Khalifah 
Al Thani to the Yemeni president, and to the people of Yemen of 
their wishes for continued prosperity and growth. His 
Excellency, the minister spoke of the special relations that 
bind the sisterly countries and are undergoing continuous 
improvement. For his part, the Yemeni president expressed his 
profound pleasure with the level of development of Yemeni-Qatari 
relations, and affirmed Yemen's desire to advance these 
relations to a higher level for the benefit of the sisterly 
countries and our Arab and Islamic nation. The meeting was 
attended by the Yemeni Minister of Information and his 
accompanying delegation. The session on Qatari-Yemeni 
informational talks had begun before noon yesterday under the 
chairmanship of the information ministers of the two countries, 
His Excellency Dr. Hamad Bin-'Abd-al-'Aziz al-Kuwari and Hasan 
Ahmad al-Lawzi. 
  At the start of the talks, Yemeni Minister of Information 
Hasan al-Lawzi welcomed Dr. Hamad Bin-'Abd-al-'Aziz al-Kuwari 
and his accompanying delegation, and said: "I am happy and 
gratified for your response in accepting the invitation to visit 
your country, the Republic of Yemen, which has experienced a new 
impetus to improve bilateral relations, not only on the 
informational and cultural level, but also on informational, 
cultural, and other levels as well. This level will also serve 
to actuate all existing areas of cooperation between the two 
sister countries." 
  He added: "I hope this visit will avail you of the 
opportunity to examine closely all aspects of life in Yemen, and 
to become intimately acquainted with the true nature of 
conditions, achievements, and changes that have taken place in 
this country. This visit will be an opportunity for us, through 
yourselves, to become acquainted with the procession of progress 
in the State of Qatar and which we follow, whenever possible, 
over all media. Hence, we affirm our pride in the judicious and 
equable policy of our second country, the State of Qatar, 
whether it involves its bilateral or regional relations, its 
policy and program of national endeavors, or its joint Arab 
activity. And if our praise is praise generally directed, it 
would be incumbent upon us to specifically praise the bilateral 
relations of the two sisterly nations, for they are special and 
evolving relations. We indeed hope that our relations be such 
that they form a positive model in our Arab homeland, especially 
as we live in a single geographical area, which affirms the 
importance of enhancing informational and cultural cooperation". 
He added, "By such scope, we are able to present an honorable 
example of relations in all areas". 
  In his speech, the Yemeni minister broached the domains of 
informational and cultural cooperation, saying, "A cooperation 
was signed here in Sanaa in May of 1990; through its 
implementation, we will achieve positive steps in the area of 
informational cooperation". 
<H5>  Qatari Information Minister's Speech </H5>
  The Yemeni minister then presented the floor to Dr. Hamad 
Bin-'Abd-al-'Aziz al-Kuwari, who thanked, on his own behalf and 
that of the members of the delegation, the dispatch of the 
hospitable invitation to visit Yemen. He added: "I express my 
thanks and those of the members of the accompanying delegation 
for this hospitable invitation to visit our second homeland, 
this ancient, sisterly country with a special place in the soul 
of every Arab. Since each of us was looking forward to visiting 
this dearly beloved country, we could not but accept the 
invitation. We have experienced pleasure ever since setting foot 
in this country, and we thank you for your gracious hospitality 
and your generosity, a generosity that we became aware of from 
the very start and one that is not surprising, for you are of 
the Arab fold, and generosity is the most prominent 
characteristic of Arabs." 
  He continued: "This visit is among a series that seek to 
develop and improve relations between our two sisterly 
countries. These visits were initiated a short time ago by the 
visit of His Excellency Foreign Minister Shaykh Hamad Bin-Jasim 
Bin-Jabbur Al-Thani, who visited your sisterly country and 
discussed with its leaders all aspects of mutual relations. In 
continuation of that process, begun by the foreign minister, we 
are here today to focus on an important and vital aspect, one 
that is as important as all others, that of informational and 
cultural relations. Information has become a mark of this era, 
especially in the global development of communications. Thus, we 
are in support of this meeting as well as the exchange of 
opinions on the manner of dealing with this vital aspect, that 
which has been decreed by the scientific, technological and 
informational development in the world as a whole." 
  In the course of his speech, the minister congratulated the 
people of Yemen on the realization of unification, and said: "I 
am pleased to congratulate the people of Yemen on their 
achievements, especially the unification of Yemen, which we hope 
becomes more firmly established each passing day, and becomes an 
example to be followed by Arabs as a whole. We wish you success 
and prosperity in this unity, which has realized not only a 
dream of Yemenis, but one of Arabs as a whole. We realize the 
challenges that confront you in the area of development; despite 
the obstacles involved, you have been successful in achieving a 
great deal. We look forward to the development of relations in 
the interests of both sisterly peoples. I would like to signal 
out and commend the role of the sisterly Yemeni expatriate 
community and its contributions to the development of Qatar. 
This is a fact that cannot be denied; on the contrary, we 
express it with profound appreciation, as our Yemeni brethren 
have lived in Qatar and taken part in its development from the 
very start. Many of them are Qatari citizens, and they have been 
good to a fault, while all their deeds have had the best 
interests of Qatar in mind. To them, we convey our thanks and 
appreciation. 
  I hope that this visit is a springboard of benefit, begun by 
the fOreign minister, for development of relations in various 
areas, especially that of information and culture, which 
possibly we may be able to discuss during this session. The 
discussion of this topic starts from a discussion of the 
informational agreement signed by ex-Minister of Information 
(now Minister of Health) Shaykh Hamad Bin-Suhaym in May 1990, 
along with brother Hasan al-Lawzi. Unfortunately, certain 
circumstances, passing as a summer cloud does, precluded 
follow-up on the matter. But a summer cloud passes rapidly, 
leaving ever-clear skies. Thus, God willing, we begin 
implementing this agreement, and consideration of the means to 
bolster relations between our two countries in all areas." 
<H5>  Informational Agreement Implementation Talks </H5>
  Later, the two parties initiated the discussion of means to 
develop the informational agreement signed two years ago, which 
encompassed coordination and cooperation in the domains of 
radio, television, news agencies, literature and newspapers, as 
well as aspects of training. Also discussed was enhancement of 
the role of the Khalifa Institute for Radio and Television, 
established at Qatar's expense, as well as the role of the 
committee during the forthcoming phase, which would enable 
advancement of the implementation of the agreement to its 
fruition. In this connection, the two sides affirmed the 
importance of follow-up for implementation of the agreement. It 
was agreed that the implementation follow-up committee meet next 
January in Doha. The Yemeni committee is headed by Ministry of 
Information Assistant Deputy Amma al-'Alim al-Suswa, External 
Information General Manager Iskander al-Asbahi and Planning and 
Follow-Up General Manager Muhi al-Hamdani, while the Qatari 
committee is headed by Qatar Ministry of Information Assistant 
Deputy for Information Shaykh Hamad Bin-Thamir Al-Thani. 
  During the talks session, the Yemeni side heard of Qatar's 
experience in the areas of radio and television, specifically 
the satellite channel, and particularly as Qatar enjoys a 19.5 
percent interest in ARABSAT. In this context, Dr. Hamad said 
that Qatar is focusing on enhancement of the public program and 
the English channel on television, that they become acceptable 
viewing in a number of Arab countries. 
  On the Qatari side, the talks session was attended by 
Assistant Deputy for Information, Shaykh Hamad Bin-Thamir 
Al-Thani, Radio Director Mubarak Jiham al-Kawari, Follow-Up and 
Planning Director 'Abdallah Sadik, and Public Relations Manager 
Ahmad al-Jida. 
  On the Yemeni side: Deputy Minister of Information Muthir 
Ahmad Taki, Ministry of Information Assistant Deputy Amma 
al-'Alim al-Suswa, Radio and Television Board Chairman Muhammad 
'Abd-al-Qawi, Public Program's Radio Sector Manager Ahmad 
al-Noubi, Ministry of Information's Information Department 
Official Salih Hajar, Director of the Khalifa Institute for 
Radio and Television 'Abd-al-Rahman al-Mishrib, Public Relations 
General Manager 'Abdallah al-Sindi, Planning and Follow-Up 
General Manager Muhi al-Hamdani, and Deputy General Manager of 
Public Relations Intisar Khalid. Tomorrow, the Qatari minister 
and his accompanying delegation will go on a fact-finding trip 
outside the capital of Sanaa. 

</TEXT>

</DOC>
