ID: 55	RANK: 54	SCORE: 11.8062

<DOC>
<DOCNO> FBIS3-46939 </DOCNO>
<HT>    "dreas005_c_94004" </HT>


<HEADER>
<AU>   FBIS-EAS-94-005 </AU>
Document Type:Daily Report 
<DATE1>  7 Jan 1994 </DATE1>

</HEADER>

<F P=100> North Korea </F>
<H3> <TI>   `Outbursts' of ROK Defense Officials Denounced </TI></H3>
<F P=102>  SK0601125194 Pyongyang Korean Central Broadcasting Network 
in Korean 1150 GMT 5 Jan 94 </F>

<F P=103> SK0601125194 </F>
<F P=104>  Pyongyang Korean Central Broadcasting Network 
in Korean 1150 GMT 5 Jan 94 </F>



<TEXT>
Language: <F P=105>Korean </F>
Article Type:BFN 

<F P=106> [Commentary by station commentator Chong Pong-kil: </F>
"Belligerent Outbursts by Warmongers"] 
  [Text] From the beginning of the year, the South Korean 
warmongers have been running amok in instigating war fever which 
is making the situation in our country extremely tense. 
  According to broadcast reports from Seoul, the joint chiefs 
of staff of the puppet defense ministry and the army, navy, and 
air force held a so-called ceremony marking the start of the 
work for the year on 3 January. Puppet defense minister Yi 
Pyong-tae, in the ceremony, raved that the army on the ground, 
the navy on the sea, and the air force in the sky should 
maintain a strong combat posture in the new year. 
  The chairman of the puppet joint chiefs of staff vociferated 
that the military posture should be rounded off to counter the 
North's threat of war and a posture of prompt counteraction 
should be established. He, prattling on about the relations of 
military cooperation between the United States and South Korea, 
enumerated the effective management of the U.S. Forces' rapid 
deployment deterrent force and the development of the U.S.-South 
Korean joint defense posture. In the ceremony, the puppet army 
chief of staff, chief of naval operations, and air force chief 
of staff also bellowed bellicose outbursts. 
  Such belligerent power-reeking outbursts by the heads of the 
puppet military circles from the beginning of the year blatantly 
reveal their scheme of armed confrontation with us and they are 
an intolerable grave challenge to the fellow countrymen who 
aspire to peace and reunification of the country. 
  As it is well known, the great leader Comrade Kim Il-song, 
stressing in his New Year address that the fatherland's 
reunification is the supreme task of our people which must not 
be delayed, again clarified that our party and the government of 
our Republic will make every effort to reunify the country in 
the form of confederation which is based on one nation, one 
state, two systems and two governments; on the three principles 
of independence, peaceful reunification, and great national 
unity. 
  All the compatriots in the North, South, and overseas, on 
hearing the New Year address, fervently support and welcome the 
principled stance regarding the fatherland's reunification 
clarified by the respected and beloved Comrade Kim Il-song and 
turn out in a struggle to implement it, saying that it is a 
programmatic guideline that breaks a deadlock lying in the way 
of the reunification and peacefully expedites the cause of the 
country's reunification by means of the nation's independent 
strength. 
  The South Korean warmongers clique, however, gathered in one 
place, hatched the war conspiracy and enumerated provocative 
outbursts. These facts clearly prove that the South Korean 
puppets are anti-dialogue, anti-reunification elements who have 
no will to work for peace and reunification. 
  What cannot be overlooked is the fact that the South Korean 
puppets are prattling on about military cooperation with outside 
forces instead of exerting their efforts to end the country's 
division in order to achieve national reconciliation and unity. 
In fact, the rascals are attempting to keep the U.S. Forces in 
South Korea forever and collude with them to provoke war aimed 
at northward invasion against their fellow countrymen. 
  Last year, the South Korean puppets--ignoring the 10-point 
program of the great unity of the whole nation which is 
acceptable to anyone who wants the country's reunification and 
our proposal for peace to exchange special envoys aimed at 
discussing and resolving the pending issues between the North 
and South--have staged a large scale war exercises almost every 
day, including the Team Spirit war exercise--a test nuclear war 
and a preliminary war, with the United States and have resorted 
to anti-Republic intrigues, vociferating about military 
countermeasure. 
  Puppet traitor Kim Yong-sam, wandering about in units on the 
front line dressed in a puppet army uniform, did not hesitate to 
commit acts of stirring up war fever. Successive belligerent 
outbursts, such as calling for a posture of prompt 
counteraction, enumerated by the South Korean warmongers clique 
from the beginning of the year are done in the projected line of 
such anti-Republic intrigues. 
  The Kim Yong-sam puppet clique's insidious acts of 
deliberately straining the situation and continuously taking the 
road of northward provocation, challenging all compatriots who 
unanimously aspire to peace and reunification of the country, 
will never be tolerated. If the rascals continue to go on the 
road of war aimed at northward invasion in the new year, they 
will not be safe. We will control the fire with fire and give a 
strict punishment to the provokers. 
  The South Korean puppets must stop behaving rashly, clearly 
realizing that their acts of pushing the situation on the Korean 
peninsula to an acute phase of confrontation will only result in 
their own self-destruction. They should better take the road of 
great national unity and reunification in conformity with the 
aspiration and demand of compatriots. 

</TEXT>

</DOC>
