ID: 4	RANK: 62	SCORE: 12.2396

<DOC>
<DOCNO> FBIS4-25864 </DOCNO>
<HT>    "drchi115_u_94001" </HT>


<HEADER>
<AU>   FBIS-CHI-94-115 </AU>
Daily Report 
<DATE1>  14 Jun 1994 </DATE1>

</HEADER>

<F P=100> PRC MEDIA ON TAIWAN AFFAIRS </F>
<H3> <TI>   Li Teng-hui Remarks Intended To `Split' Motherland </TI></H3>
<HT><F P=107><PHRASE>    Li Teng-hui Remarks Intended To `Split' Motherland </PHRASE></F></HT>

<F P=102>   OW1506062994 Beijing XINHUA Domestic Service in Chinese 0110 
GMT 14 Jun 94 </F>

<F P=103> OW1506062994 </F>
<F P=104>  Beijing XINHUA Domestic Service </F>
<F P=105>  Chinese </F>


<TEXT>
BFN 

<F P=106> [Roundup by a XINHUA reporter: "Li Denghui's (Li Teng-hui) </F>
Remarks Intended To Split the Motherland Have Aroused Grave 
Concern From the People on Both Sides of the Strait"] 
  [Text] Beijing, 14 June (XINHUA) -- Of late, Taiwan's 
preeminent power-holder Li Denghui went to some Central American 
countries and South Africa to blow his own trumpet there, trying 
to buy over some people to support Taiwan's "return to the 
United Nations." He unscrupulously spread statements within and 
outside the island intended to split the motherland, attacking 
and vilifying the Communist Party of China [CPC]. What Li 
Denghui has done has aroused grave concern from the people on 
both sides of the strait. 
  From 4 to 16 May, Li Denghui was active in Nicaragua, Costa 
Rica, South Africa, and Swaziland. During this period, he said 
on many occasions that Taiwan "must engage in diplomacy as a 
sovereign country and that Taiwan `will not retreat from its 
stand of joining the United Nations'." He slandered China's 
leaders as having a "rigid concept" (originally from the 
Japanese, meaning "as hard as cement") and even shouted an 
abuse, calling mainland leaders "bandits." Before his visit to 
these countries, during his "frank dialogue" with a Japanese 
writer on the island of Taiwan, he said he would like to talk 
about "the sadness of the Taiwanese people," saying that Taiwan, 
recovered by China from the hand of the Japanese aggressors, had 
been ruled by "a foreign political power," that the call of the 
Chinese communists for cross-strait reunification was "a strange 
rigmarole," and that "the term China is ambiguous." He also 
styled himself as Moses who led the Jews out of Egypt to build a 
new country. He also said he had been a Japanese until he 
reached age 22. On 20 May, when he attended the extraordinary 
meeting of "the National Assembly" in Taiwan, Li Denghui once 
again declared: "One China is our future objective, but it does 
not exist at present." Once again he was selling his so-called 
theory of "two China's," one of which is the "Republic of China 
on Taiwan." 
  Public opinion inside and outside of Taiwan showed that 
these 
splittist remarks by Li Denghui "have truly revealed his true 
features." In recent years some principal power holders in 
Taiwan have switched from pushing "elastic diplomacy" and 
"essential diplomacy" to "pragmatic diplomacy" and "vacation 
diplomacy," and switched from a policy of "two Chinas as a 
phase," raised at the Seattle Asia-Pacific Economic Cooperation 
forum last winter, to the recently raised policy of "accepting 
dual recognition by South Africa of both sides of the strait." 
This amply shows they are moving toward the path taken by the 
advocates of "Taiwan independence." A columnist on the island 
commented by saying: "In the past, the DPP [Democratic 
Progressive Party] has been publicizing the "Taiwan 
independence" ideal, but this is no longer the DPP's patent. 
What the KMT is doing "pragmatically" now is promoting "Taiwan 
independence." A Hong Kong newspaper, in a signed article, 
points out: Recently Li Denghui "made one rigmarole after 
another; he is distorting history." He said "nonsensically that 
there is the `Republic of China on Taiwan.' Actually, it is 
`independent Taiwan' and is also `Taiwan independence.'" In an 
editorial, Taiwan's LIAN HE BAO [LIEN HO PAO] said: If Li 
Denghui's doctrine of "foreign political power" exists, then it 
is necessary to "smear or revise history." Remarks about "the 
sadness of the Taiwan people" and "foreign political power" are 
originally the principal views of the advocates of "Taiwan 
independence." By taking the lead in "staging this kind of 
show," Li Denghui is trying "to stir up sentiments" and "incite 
enmity." By styling himself as Moses in the Bible, he "is not 
honest with himself." At a discussion meeting, a person from 
the press circle called these remarks of Li Denghui "helpful to 
the `Taiwan independence' movement" and "harmful to the Chinese 
people." 

</TEXT>

</DOC>
