ID: 85	RANK: 89	SCORE: 4.2451

<DOC>
<DOCNO> FBIS4-12822 </DOCNO>
<HT>    "drnes072_v_94012" </HT>


<HEADER>
<AU>   FBIS-NES-94-072 </AU>
Daily Report 
<DATE1>  13 Apr 1994 </DATE1>

</HEADER>

<F P=100> Pakistan </F>
<H3> <TI>   Editorial Hails Iran's Support on Nuclear, Kashmir Issues </TI></H3>
<HT><F P=107><PHRASE>    Editorial Hails Iran's Support on Nuclear, Kashmir Issues </PHRASE></F></HT>

<F P=102>   BK1304101694 Rawalpindi NAWA-I-WAQT in Urdu 13 Apr 94 p 10 </F>
<F P=103> BK1304101694 </F>
<F P=104>  Rawalpindi NAWA-I-WAQT </F>
<F P=105>  Urdu </F>


<TEXT>
BFN 

<F P=106> [Editorial: "Iranian Speaker's Address -- Where Do We </F>
Stand?"] 
  [Text] Iranian Parliament Speaker 'Ali Akbar Nateq-Nuri 
addressed the Pakistan National Assembly and has fully and 
strongly supported Pakistan on its nuclear program and the 
Kashmir issue. He warned that attempts by any foreign power to 
influence events in the region will go against the security 
interests of the neighboring Islamic countries. Iran has 
established close friendly relations with Pakistan after the 
Islamic revolution and has always sympathized with Islamabad 
whenever it faced problems. 
  The manner in which Nateq-Nuri, in his National Assembly 
speech, has openly assured Iran's support on the serious 
problems facing Pakistan will further strengthen the spirit of 
Islamic brotherhood in this region. In fact, the nuclear issue 
or the Kashmir dispute does not affect Pakistan alone, but they 
also have a direct impact on the neighboring Islamic states. If 
Pakistan is made weak, God forbid, in the nuclear field, then it 
will lead to the weakening of the entire Muslim community. If, 
under the alleged conspiracies, a third option [preceding two 
words in English] is adopted to settle the Kashmir dispute, then 
it is feared the United States and anti-Islamic forces might 
turn Kashmir into a base for international machination and from 
there orchestrate their conspiracies to weaken the Muslim 
countries of the region. Iran is also facing U.S. pressure on 
the nuclear issue, and, hence, it can fully realize Pakistan's 
difficulties in this regard. Nateq-Nuri's remarks help us to 
assess to what extent Iran desires to see Pakistan militarily 
become strong. 
  Coincidentally, the Iranian speaker arrived in Islamabad the 
same day the U.S. delegation was departing from Pakistan. On 
that occasion, Pakistan and the United States issued a joint 
statement expressing their resolve to continue to strive to 
strengthen bilateral relations. The U.S. delegation was led by 
Deputy Secretary of State Strobe Talbott, who had come to 
Pakistan after visiting India. The main purpose of his visit 
was nothing but to help eliminate the nuclear arms race in the 
Indian subcontinent. However, it is ironic that while in India 
nobody listened to what Mr. Talbott had to say, in Pakistan his 
delegation was welcomed and heard very enthusiastically. Even 
though the Government of Pakistan asserts that no national 
interest was compromised, the wording of the joint statement and 
the expression of happiness on the face of Talbott during his 
meetings with the president and the prime minister and at the 
news briefing rightly lead one to suspect what success led the 
U.S. representative to display such a sense of happiness. The 
use of vague language in the joint statement itself reflects the 
success of the U.S. stand. The foreign media is also giving the 
same impression. Even though the supply of F-16's has not been 
tied to the capping of the nuclear program, Pakistan has also 
not openly showed a red signal to the U.S. moves; it is worth 
noting that the two countries will adopt the path of "quiet 
diplomacy" to resolve the nuclear issue. This method is 
definitely useful for the United States, but it is also 
tantamount to openly deceiving the Pakistani people. The 
Government of Pakistan, therefore, must remain cognizant of the 
fact that the people will never accept any compromise -- open or 
secret -- on their independence, security, and sovereignty! The 
government must not commit even the slightest mistake in 
understanding the feelings of the nation. Similar are the 
sentiments of the neighboring Islamic states and further 
progress in the nuclear program is essential for enhancing the 
strength of both Pakistan and the Islamic community. 

</TEXT>

</DOC>
