ID: 39	RANK: 74	SCORE: 13.7912

<DOC>
<DOCNO> FBIS4-18509 </DOCNO>
<HT>    "drweu066_h_94004" </HT>


<HEADER>
<AU>   FBIS-WEU-94-066 </AU>
Daily Report 
<DATE1>  11 Mar 1994 </DATE1>

</HEADER>

<F P=100> GERMANY </F>
<H3> <TI>   Scharping Seen To Embody SPD's Will To Win </TI></H3>
<HT><F P=107><PHRASE>    Scharping Seen To Embody SPD's Will To Win </PHRASE></F></HT>

<F P=102>   94EN0290A Hamburg DIE ZEIT in German 11 Mar 94 p 3 </F>
<F P=103> 94EN0290A </F>
<F P=104>  Hamburg DIE ZEIT </F>
<F P=105>  German </F>


<TEXT>
CSO 

<F P=106> [Article by Werner A. Perger: "A Cool Fighter Who Is Putting </F>
an End to the Foolishness"] 
  [Text]Rudolf Scharping embodies Social Democracy's will to 
win. He has lined up the Social Democratic Party [SPD] behind 
him, and he intends to lead it to power. 
  More than ever in this government's tenure, a change of 
power 
is in the air, and this quiet preliminary hint of spring has a 
name: Rudolf Scharping. Strangely unobtrusively, somehow as if 
it were an incidental matter, the 46-year-old man from the 
Westerwald has established himself in the public consciousness. 
Gradually, he is imparting concrete features to the post-Kohl 
era. 
  The boss. Even though he is not yet very 
well-known, thanks to his omnipresence, he is an old 
acquaintance. There is something self-evident about his claim to 
power. That is, perhaps, the most important prerequisite for the 
change that Scharping wants to bring about. 
  Almost single-handedly, he has led the party to its current 
position, within reach of power. With persuasion, a great 
investment of time, and toughness. He has compelled many a 
consensus. The fact that Scharping becomes massive where he 
senses resistance was something critics within the party 
encountered first-hand in his Rhineland-Palatinate land 
association. Anyone this stubborn man at the helm himself 
perceives to be stubborn is in for a rough ride. One of his 
colleagues says: "Rudolf has a long memory for such things." 
  Scharping himself considers patience and fortitude to be his 
virtues in this way. The process matters, not the result. The 
result decides, not the moment. He says: "Whoever wants 
everything in the result comes acropper in the process." 
  Rudolf Scharping cites an example: some at the party 
convention in Wiesbaden would have criticized him for not 
honoring the importance of women. Now, however, the party--as a 
result of his leadership--is appointing two women to the Supreme 
Court, the result of a lengthy process of which the unworthy 
hanger-on party surrounding the candidacy of Herta 
Daeubler-Gmelin was a part. She herself put an end to the wicked 
game by her refusal. "Results count, not the event," says 
Sharping. Have you got that? 
  Scharping and his party. He has travelled a long road to 
align the SPD behind his will to power and to unite it to his 
strategy of power. In the processes, differences were planed 
away that it would have been preferable to retain. Distinctions 
from other parties grow pale. The SPD is pushing its way to 
power through the middle. Heiner Geissler speaks of a "Christian 
Democratization of the SPD." He says that is dangerous for the 
Christian Democratic Union [CDU]. There hardly are any 
distinctions between the major parties any longer, say, almost 
in unison, members of the left-wing Frankfurt circle and 
commentators of the FRANKFURTER ALLGEMEINE, by no means 
left-wing, alike. Scharping himself claims to be quite close to 
the foreign and security policies of Kohl and Kinkel. His 
message is: have no fear. A change at the top will bring no 
change in foreign policy. By taking flight forward, he also 
considers the issue of internal security to be disarmed. 
Liberals and members of the left wing might well grit their 
teeth and moan: "Internal security is a real issue; that must be 
taken seriously by a left-wing party, otherwise `deepest 
sympathies.'" 
  On the road to power today, the watchword is: "Discord 
confuses the voters. Unity calms them." In the SPD, which is 
notorious for its discord, Scharping has prevailed in large 
measure, politically as well as personally, with commensurate 
expenditures of time and energy. "No path too long, no time too 
precious," he says of this part of his leadership work. 
  Since the members elected him chairman in a preliminary 
election, he has been on his way within the party. There is 
hardly a regional party convention in which he does not 
participate. But, he also takes prudent care of the neglected 
egos of the Social Democratic grandees: he honors milestone 
birthdays in the establishment, if possible, by his presence, 
especially the 50th, which is an ever-increasing occurrence 
among the "grandchildren," a group among which he, the youngest 
in this age group, has not really been counted for a long time. 
  He has just learned the extent to which the new feeling of 
commonality and closed ranks has come to rest upon him. Sent to 
his sickbed for a week with a gastro-intestinal virus, the old 
Social Democratic miseries threaten to break out once more, 
namely the quarrel about traditions and changing them, the 
quarrel of the just cause, and the personal pecking order. By 
telephone, radio, television, and in the press, Scharping 
followed the SPD fight for long-term care insurance, the 
somewhat premature notification from the "barracks" that the 
chance of reaching agreement with the coalition, with Dressler's 
"not with me you don't" blustering, and Verheugen's cool "that 
is just a single opinion" could be seen. 
  That was more than the chairman could take. Still a bit 
wobbly on his legs (and nine pounds lighter), on the week-end he 
hurried, as a surprise guest to the Congress of the Task Force 
for Employee-Related Questions (AfA) in Koblenz and vented his 
spleen: "We cannot continue to dance at the same monkeys' ball 
that brought us down to the cellar." In the end, he got a 
standing ovation, though he may, in the final analysis, have to 
climb over Dressler's objections. Anyone who wants to lead 
simply cannot allow himself to be ill. 
  The Party. Scharping is a do-it-yourselfer, a 
student of the files, someone who always did his homework, in 
that point, not unlike his predecessor's predecessor, 
Hans-Jochen Vogel. But Scharping is also a team player; he can 
delegate--so much so, that his colleagues often moan. 
  Politically, he works particularly closely with Guenter 
Verheugen, the national managing director. A relationship of 
trust has grown between the two that is--if the insiders are not 
exaggerating--a rarity in this business. Strategically, their 
mechanisms tick in much the same way. Their instructions to the 
party are unadornedly tough: Closed ranks, no little games, no 
more political hanky-panky (for example, discussions of a 
red-green coalition). Clinton's campaign, and it's internal 
guiding motto, It's the economy, stupid! serves 
pretty much as the model. Anyone who has other concerns is 
rocking the boat. Anyone who speaks of visions should--to 
paraphrase the Austrian head freely--seek the advice of a 
physician. Verheugen recommends reduction to the essentials, 
"the Social Democratization of the SPD" one might say, even if 
that is not terribly exciting. 
  A decade and a half ago, when Scharping was just working his 
way up through the ranks of the Mainz SPD Landtag 
caucus, Verheugen, 49 years old, and a bit of a hack, had just 
organized a successful campaign for the Free Democratic Party 
[FDP] alongside SPD Chancellor Schmidt against the Christian 
Social Union [CSU] candidate Strauss. He knows his business, and 
its tricks, even the dirty ones. Now, even Verheugen senses, for 
the first time since reunification, when he switched to the SPD, 
that a change in power is in the wind. Perhaps that is why he 
reacted so sharply to Dressler. His first error, from 
Scharping's viewpoint, but with public censure, that, too, is 
cleared away. And Verheugen is too "cool" to let the canker 
gnaw. It is all in a day's work. Besides: "As party chairman, 
Scharping has the greatest authority since Willy Brandt." Bow 
down and be done with it. 
  The "barracks" have been beefed up. An old pro, Joachim 
Boudre-Groeger, former head of the National Managing Director 
Bahr's office, a schooled diplomat, is back on loan to party 
central, having served about 15 years in the foreign service--as 
Ambassador to Vietnam, among other things. 
  There he is Verheugen's deputy, and at the same time 
"technical campaign leader:" organizer of everything that would 
serve to bring about a change of power. 
  Reinforcements were also brought in from Hamburg: Claus Noe, 
as state counselor to Hamburg's Senator for the Economy, who 
left office after the SPD quasi coalition was formed, a man of 
long experience in Bonn. For lack of space, Oskar Lafontaine 
left the new man his desk in the "barracks;" Noe will, above 
all, act as an adjunct to his work, as an aide in formulating 
things, possibly as an advisor as well. But who knows? Perhaps, 
after the campaign work he has done, in the fall of the super 
election year, in addition to Noe's expertise, perhaps his 
experience in the failed Hamburg coalition negotiations with the 
Greens will be in demand as well. 
  Finally, there is Monday's cloverleaf. Scharping's inner 
campaign leadership. Of course, Verheugen will be a part of it, 
then, from Duesseldorf, there is the head of the state chancery 
and potential Rau successor, Wolfgang Clement; from 
Saarbruecken, Lafontaine's presumed successor, Reinhard Klimmt, 
chairman of the SPD Landtag caucus and Lafontaine 
confidant; and, from Mainz, the head of Scharping's state 
chancery, one-time and last office director of Willy Brandt's up 
to the time of his resignation as party chairman. On the 
outside, the significance of this crew is put too high. It is 
not making any political decisions. It is just planning the 
day-to-day routine of the super election year. 
  The axis. Perhaps everything would take a 
different turn if Scharping had not patched things up with 
"Oskar." At the present time, in the SPD, nothing can be done 
against Lafontaine, the deputy party chairman. It is a preferred 
position; it makes the failed chancellor candidate of 1990 a 
critical entity within his party. A strong partner, or a 
dangerous opponent. Scharping had to make a decision. 
  Lafontaine would, most preferably, have become candidate for 
the chancellorship when Engholm so relatively unexpectedly 
dropped out. Somehow or other, he felt the expectation last 
year, and promptly caused it to grow to a palpable illusion that 
a newly elected party chairman, Scharping, would offer him, 
"Oskar," this peak position, perhaps after a brief hesitation, 
or possibly just pro forma. No matter, he would have grabbed it. 
The 1990 defeat hurt him more than the memory of the attack that 
same year. He would, only too gladly, have settled his political 
accounts with Kohl, and with some in his own party, with an 
election victory. 
  But Scharping's offer was not forthcoming. The new chairman, 
who does not play second fiddle to Lafontaine by any means when 
it comes to desire for power, indicated interests of his own. 
Lafontaine was not even offended. But then, Scharping's charm 
offensive began, and he courted none so much as the seething 
lion from adjacent Saarbruecken, attentions that were intended 
to yield results. A political partnership seems to be placed on 
new footings, an alliance with one common goal: a change at the 
helm. 
  In terms of content, the axis has already withstood a few 
stress trials, particularly where the new economic 
belt-tightening and realism of thrift of the Scharping SPD is 
being debated. Holding the line, saving, shifting things around, 
rebuilding, nothing is permitted to cost more than before, every 
reform must be cost-neutral. That is the message both preach. 
They make a plea for lowering overhead, clearly turn down every 
increase in taxes and disbursements ("The limits of what can be 
tolerated have been reached"); they demand tax-incentives for 
investors (in keeping with the stability and growth law), warn 
grim tariff fighters in their own party to be flexible and 
realistic ("...not to be more radical in their rhetoric than the 
trade unions themselves.") That is not easy in a party in which 
Rudolf Dressler is not an outsider. The debate is bitter, little 
as Scharping likes it, much as Lafontaine grips his head 
afterward (as if he wanted, like another supereconomist before 
him, to despair in his own party: "alas, how much ignorance is 
there in this world..."). 
  Thanks to his somewhat strong-arm manner, the man from 
Saarbruecken now serves the left-wingers of the party as a sort 
of bogeyman. They criticize him especially as a lackey of the 
neoconservatives, in the face of whose policies of 
consolidation, which are not social in nature, Scharping is, 
when measured against Lafontaine, cut from different cloth 
altogether. That is what was said at the final meeting of the 
Frankfurt circle three weeks ago, but he does not want to let it 
stand. The axis remains. A few days later, before the SPD party 
council, Scharping insisted that the governmental quotient--that 
portion of all state expenditures of the GNP not be expanded, 
not even under an SPD regime. He made it clear that the idea was 
not just something that the wicked Oskar had dreamt up: "All 
those who think they could cozy up to Oskar in these matters had 
better realize they would have to cozy up to me in the same way." 
  The chancellor candidate and his economist, a strong union. 
They embody the SPD's will to power and they stand for the 
possibility that this year, after many rounds of voting, with 
risks for the government and the opposition alike that cannot 
yet be assessed, for the first time in Germany's postwar 
history, the opposition may come to power by being voted in. The 
hopes of many, of getting rid of the "fatso" and his "carbonara 
round" after 12 years, and perhaps, even of getting rid of the 
liberals, who have been playing a role in Bonn now for a quarter 
of a century, much too long, rest particularly with Rudolf 
Scharping. That would be, where everything else has changed, 
certainly a considerable step, by what then? Does Scharping, 
does Lafontaine, stand for new things? Do they promise anything 
more than a continuation of the old by new means? These are 
questions that the new, no longer so very young generation of 
the SPD must first answer. 
  In an interview, Scharping says he has little time to woo 
trust. It is as if he were asking for an advance. He senses the 
impatience among those who still see the sense of politics, he 
can imagine the expectations. The meetings that are filled to 
overflowing create hope. "Stop talking about being annoyed," he 
tells the party. It would be possible to convince oneself to do 
that. "I, myself, sense annoyance at being annoyed," he mocks. 
And he thinks he can sense that there is something stirring 
throughout the country. A change in mood. A mood to change the 
powers that be. 

</TEXT>

</DOC>
