ID: 39	RANK: 84	SCORE: 12.6108

<DOC>
<DOCNO> FBIS4-65549 </DOCNO>
<HT>    "drweu097_h_94015" </HT>


<HEADER>
<AU>   FBIS-WEU-94-097 </AU>
Daily Report 
<DATE1>  29 Apr 1994 </DATE1>

</HEADER>

<F P=100> GERMANY </F>
<H3> <TI>   Scharping's Circle of Advisers Profiled </TI></H3>
<HT><F P=107><PHRASE>    Scharping's Circle of Advisers Profiled </PHRASE></F></HT>

<F P=102>   94EN0339A Munich SUEDDEUTSCHE ZEITUNG in German 29 Apr 94 p 3 </F>
<F P=103> 94EN0339A </F>
<F P=104>  Munich SUEDDEUTSCHE ZEITUNG </F>
<F P=105>  German </F>


<TEXT>
CSO 

<F P=106> [Article by Ulrich Deupmann: "Mondays It's a Matter of </F>
Power; Scharping's Kitchen Cabinet: Six Strategists Bet on 
Victory"] 
  [Text] The "Monday circle," which is shrouded in secrecy, 
met for seven and a half hours, from four in the afternoon until 
half past eleven at night. Rudolf Scharping, head of the Social 
Democratic Party [SPD], met with a group of his closest advisors 
at party headquarters in a brainstorming session concerning 
election campaign strategy. Election slogans were presented to 
the circle, then rejected once more. Then it was a matter of 
selecting some pictures for election posters. The slide 
projector showed pictures of the chairman on the wall: Scharping 
on vacation in Mallorca, in a denim shirt, or in a highly 
serious pose. Suddenly it was nearly as cozy as if it were in 
someone's living room. There were some jokes about some of the 
snapshots, and Scharping, like any "pater familias," got just a 
bit touchy. 
  "Monday circle": under this by-word, since January, at the 
outset of nearly every week a sort of SPD party chairman's 
kitchen cabinet, for which the party by-laws make no provision, 
has been meeting to chart the party's "operative course." Among 
this circle of the elect, in addition to Guenter Verheugen, the 
national managing director, are the head of the state chancery 
in Rhineland-Palatinate, Karl-Heinz Klaer; Wolfgang Clement, 
Klaer's counterpart from North Rhine-Westphalia; Reinhard 
Klimmt, head of the SPD caucus in Saarbruecken's Landtag: and 
Peter Struck, parliamentary managing director of the SPD 
Bundestag caucus. All these men are in their mid-forties to 
early fifties, that is to say, as old as the party chairman. All 
have strategic minds'; all are professionals in the day-to-day 
business of politics; all are anything but pantywaists. Being 
possessed of a strategic mind: that means knowing one's way 
through Bonn's political jungle, finding it fun to sniff out the 
opponent's traps early in the game, and laying a few traps of 
one's own, but it also means finding the hazardous focal points 
in one's own camp and disarming them. 
  The exceptional meeting on Sunday [24 April] definitely 
served as an external expression of the fact that "the training 
period is now over and the first half-time is starting," as 
Scharping said last week in the SPD Bundestag caucus. In the hot 
phase of the campaign, what is at stake for the SPD is rescuing 
over time the opinion poll results, which have been less and 
less favorable, by election day, which is set for 16 October. It 
nearly appears as if the electorate, for the fourth time in a 
row, believed that the SPD overdid it in the training and came 
up short in the game. The pitiful experience of the defeat, and 
the knowledge that Kohl can pour it on for a final spurt at the 
end, are matters of which most participants of the Monday circle 
are only all too keenly aware. In 1986-87, Wolfgang Clement had 
a key contributory role in managing the fruitless Bundestag 
campaign for the SPD's candidate for the chancellorship, 
Johannes Rau. In 1990, Reinhard Klimmt and Karl-Heinz Klaer 
attempted to advise the candidate for chancellor, Oskar 
Lafontaine, in the election campaign. By no means the last 
lesson shared by the group as a result of its experiences is 
Rudolf Scharping's firm article of faith: the opposition has 
never yet been elected to the government because of its better 
program; quite the contrary: the people have elected their 
chancellor out of pity for him or his policies. A participant in 
the Monday circle expresses the SPD strategy that follows from 
this in very simple terms: "Disarm the government, take the toys 
right out of its hands, then crack the nut." 
  The "strong men" before whom Kohl and Schaeubele are 
expected 
to quake in fear, are unknown quantities in terms of national 
politics. Karl-Heinz Klaer, for example, as head of the state 
chancery in Mainz, the right hand man of the minister-president 
of Rhineland-Palatinate: after the 1990 defeat in the Bundestag 
election, Klaer offered Scharping, who was the leader of the 
opposition at the time, to organize the Landtag election with 
him, and go with him to Mainz. Up to that point, Klaer had been 
responsible within party headquarters, in his capacity as 
division chief, for strategic planning and "observing the 
enemy"; prior to that, he had served party boss Willy Brandt as 
office manager. Scharping knows that in the last analysis, he 
owes his victory in the election to the party chairmanship to 
this intimate party acquaintanceship. After that, Klaer 
consciously remained in Mainz. With their "close ties" to one 
another, they want to disarm the charge that Scharping, because 
of obligations in Bonn, was neglecting his job as 
minister-president. Should Scharping become the chancellor in 
October, it is almost a certainty that he will entrust 
Karl-Heinz Klaer with the post of head of the office of the 
chancellor. 
  Peter Struck, the managing director of the SPD Bundestag 
caucus, who is skilled with the media, may justifiably hope that 
in that case, he would occupy the influential boss' chair in the 
caucus. With his outgoing ways--Struck uses the familiar form of 
address with nearly everyone in Bonn, from Theo Waigel, head of 
the Christian Social Union [CSU] to the Greens' Joschka 
Fischer--he has managed to pull off many a political trick that 
would have eluded a person with a gloomier disposition. He 
always garners the evil eye from members of his own party 
whenever he leans against the government's bench, engrossed in 
some confidential joke or other with Chancellor Helmut Kohl. In 
addition, the rough-and-ready way in which, from time to time, 
Struck calls the SPD deputies to order has won him a few 
enemies, as well as friends. 
<H5>  Political Craftsmen </H5>
  Wolfgang Clement and Reinhard Klimmt create the axis to 
Scharping's chief allies in the SPD in Scharping's Monday 
circle. Clement is considered to be Johannes Rau's alter ego, 
Klimmt, as "permanent number two man" behind his friend from 
student days, the head of the Saarland government, Oskar 
Lafontaine. Both have been selected by their ministers-president 
as crown princes. 
  This circle--together with Verheugen--is unified by the view 
of political practice. For them, ultimately, political questions 
are questions of power, or, as one participant put it: "Of what 
good is the most beautiful ecological platform to us if we do 
not have the power to implement it?" Their understanding of 
themselves rather resembles that of craftsmen, political actors 
who, in the second tier, keep the machinery running. Visions are 
not their field of expertise. 
  And certainly, it is no accident that the SPD boss has 
surrounded himself with precisely these friends. Scharping and 
his cronies have had enough of "opposition politics without 
consequences." That is the explanation for current tensions 
between this second tier of the party leadership and that wing 
of the Social Democrats who think in terms of platforms. For 
Scharping, taking over the power is of primary importance, not 
pure convictions. 
  The tensions were discharged in thunder and lightning over 
the weekend when it became known that Christoph Zoepel had 
vented his spleen in DER SPIEGEL. Zoepel, who is responsible for 
transportation and housing in Scharping's government platform 
committee, used his well-known sharp tongue to analyze the 
situation: "Since the original election, there have been nothing 
but personalities. They have opinions that can no longer be 
altered by the opinions of the party. The SPD is now a party of 
the presidium." For a long time, Zoepel had fought for the 
inclusion of a speed limit in the platform, also for confessing 
that any federal government, regardless which one, would have to 
increase the petroleum tax. Scharping blue penciled these 
provisions from the draft on him, and at some point, Zoepel 
decide to save his breath to cool his porridge. 
  Perhaps he would have done better not to have done so, 
because Scharping's reactions to public slogans of the 
"presidial party" type are definitely touchy. At the SPD 
presidium on Monday [25 April], there was such a row between the 
two that those who were sitting in the vicinity prefer to 
maintain a guarded silence on the subject, even after the fact. 
Scharping took an imperious tone toward Zoepel, saying if he had 
something against the platform, he should say so beforehand, in 
private. Zoepel interjected it was a matter of his reputation. 
Finally, the SPD boss threatened to throw Zoepel out of the 
government committee. Ultimately, they struck a compromise, 
demanding a speed limit according to the resolutions of the 
European Parliament. That body has decided to impose pretty much 
everything from 120 to 150 kilometers per hour. And so, in the 
future, anyone can pick from the platform whatever speed limit 
he likes, more or less. Oskar Lafontaine and Gerhard Schroeder, 
incidentally, at least so it is rumored, were amused by the 
quarrel. A "presidial party" would not be so bad at all, 
Schroeder is claimed to have said. 
  Scharping cut a deal by which he was permitted to state his 
views in a preface to the governing platform all by himself. It 
is said that the content will not contain any surprises, Guenter 
Verheugen hastens to explain. The party boss wants to bring 
those matters that concern him the most to the foreground, 
namely fighting unemployment and the desire for a fresh start 
for the country. The fact that the speed limit played an overly 
important role in the process is something no one has to 
believe. That is "the least important matter we have discussed 
in two years," one high-ranking member of the party leadership 
says and he adds: "Whoever believes we can win an election on 
that point also believes in Santa Claus." 

</TEXT>

</DOC>
