ID: 1	RANK: 63	SCORE: 11.3029

<DOC>
<DOCNO> FBIS4-42544 </DOCNO>
<HT>    "drweu108_j_94003" </HT>


<HEADER>
<AU>   FBIS-WEU-94-108 </AU>
Daily Report 
<DATE1>  14 May 1994 </DATE1>

</HEADER>

<F P=100> ITALY &amp; VATICAN CITY </F>
<H3> <TI>   Article Examines National Image </TI></H3>
<HT><F P=107><PHRASE>    Article Examines National Image </PHRASE></F></HT>

<F P=102>   94ES0317A Milan PANORAMA in Italian 14 May 94 pp 18-20 </F>
<F P=103> 94ES0317A </F>
<F P=104>  Milan PANORAMA </F>
<F P=105>  Italian </F>


<TEXT>
CSO 

<F P=106> [Article by Carlo Rossella: "Keep Your Mouth Shut; the Enemy </F>
Is Watching You!"] 
  [Text] Is everyone against Italy? Not exactly: 
Clinton and Kohl have adopted a wait-and-see attitude; Mitterand 
is putting his thoughts in writing; Israel is divided on the 
subject; and Lady Thatcher offers advice. Following the 
controversial vote in Strasbourg, here is an analysis of some of 
the expressions of hostility, praise, and fear emanating from 
our allies. 
  In the diplomatic jargon of Washington it is called a 
"one-man memo" [preceding two words in English]--a report 
drafted by one person. The title of the approximately 50-page 
document is quite unambiguous: "The Neofascist Peril in Italy 
and in Europe." It was written by an official of the State 
Department shortly before the 27 March elections. The pamphlet 
never reached the top levels of the U.S. foreign policy 
establishment--i.e., the offices of Secretary of State Warren 
Christopher and his deputy Strobe Talbott--but it was read and 
reread by many government officials. The aforementioned analyst 
maintained that although Gianfranco Fini's party has changed its 
name it is still in the mainstream of the European far Right, 
which is revanchist, neopopulist, and hostile to the values of 
the democratic west. 
  The analyst's report was presumably compiled from 
information 
obtained in Rome and in Washington based on CIA intelligence or 
on some of the numerous essays published in the United States 
following Vladimir Zhirinovsky's victory in the Russian 
elections. It is quite possible that the report will reach Bill 
Clinton's desk before Clinton's two trips to Italy. The American 
president will visit Rome on 2 and 3 June to celebrate the 
allied landings at Anzio, and he will be in Italy again from 8 
to 10 July for the G-7 summit in Naples. In only three 
weeks--when Clinton makes his first visit--Silvio Berlusconi 
will learn whether the campaign of the hostile press--and the 
pressures from liberal circles and diplomats abroad--have had an 
effect on the president of the United States. Neither the White 
House--nor, for that matter, the U.S. embassy in Rome, headed by 
the able Reginald Bartholomew--has subscribed to the fears and 
denunciations expressed by representatives of other allied 
countries at the inclusion, in the cabinet, of members of the 
National Alliance. Bartholomew has, however, told a high-ranking 
official of the Italian Government that it would be very 
embarrassing for Clinton to commemorate the bloody battle of 
Anzio--which the Americans fought against the Nazi troops in 
January 1944--in the presence of the heirs of Il Duce. 
  Aside from this problem, however, the United States is 
waiting to assess the new government on the basis of the facts. 
It expects that none of the National Alliance ministers will 
prove to be someone who has avowed Fascist sympathies. It 
predicts that Italy will continue to be a loyal friend within 
NATO. It hopes that all the international commitments--including 
the Osimo Treaty with the former Yugoslavia--will be kept. "To 
be sure," Angelo Codevilla, one of the gurus from the Hoover 
Institution acknowledges, "the stories filed by the American 
reporters from Rome and the newspaper headlines--such as the one 
in THE NEW YORK TIMES, which proclaimed the return of the 
fascists [preceding word in English] to the government--are a 
matter of concern to the public, but Americans are not getting 
shivers down their spine the way some Europeans are. Perhaps 
Fini is truly taking the far Right toward the center. Perhaps he 
will succeed in getting his followers to remove their black 
shirts and put on business suits. Let's give him a trial period 
of a few months." 
  In Strasbourg--where the election campaign for the new 
European Parliament is already heating up--the climate is quite 
different from Washington's somewhat detached wait-and-see 
attitude. As the politicians who meet in Rome with the 
ambassadors from the European Union [EU] point out, there are 
those who perceive "the danger of a resurgence of the far Right 
in Europe" and make little distinction between fascists, 
neofascists, and the postfascists of the National Alliance. A 
substantial lobbying [preceding word in English] operation by 
Achille Occhetto and associates led--on the night of Wednesday 4 
May-Thursday 5 May--to a motion of censure (189 votes to 188) 
directed against the inclusion of Fini's people in the Italian 
Government. 
  While some were recalling that a similar blitz [preceding 
word in English] waged by the European Left had led to approval 
of the rules concerning the adoption of children by gay 
[preceding word in English] couples--and while the Palazzo 
Quirinale [office of the president of Italy] was issuing a 
speedy reply opposing any interference (President Oscar Luigi 
Scalfaro wrote: "Italy does not need either warnings or 
teachers")--Occhetto was toasting his victory. The PDS 
[Democratic Party of the Left] leader (who is no longer a 
prophet in his own country) is happy to have found--on the 
international scene--a new legitimation. The European election 
campaign in Italy, France, Germany, Spain, and Great Britain 
will be waged by the parties of the Left on the issue of the 
qualunquista [man-in-the-street] threat, and Gianfranco Fini is 
saying the same thing. "The first to open fire," he told 
PANORAMA, "was Michel Rocard, secretary of the French Socialist 
Party, and precisely for internal party reasons, inasmuch as he 
fears Bernard Tapie. Then all the others chimed in." 
  Major European newspapers have likewise taken very hard-line 
positions with regard to Italian neofascism, which has the 
potential of replicating or reinforcing similar phenomena 
elsewhere on the continent. Alain Minc began the process with an 
article in LE MONDE and was followed by many commentators, from 
the Italianist Michael Sheridan--writing in the London 
INDEPENDENT--to Miguel A. Bastenier in PAIS of Madrid and the 
scholarly history lessons in DIE ZEIT of Hamburg. Although some 
correspondents in Rome may perhaps be influenced by the "Red 
salons," as Fini says, or by the "outbursts of REPUBBLICA or 
other similar newspapers," as the secretary of the National 
Alliance also claims, the analysts are capturing the moods of 
the various foreign ministries and economic potentates. The 
parties of the left are shouting, while government officials are 
voicing their opinions in more subdued tones. 
  The Germans, for example--as Helmut Kohl told some friends 
during his visit to Rome on Tuesday 3 May--fear not only the 
Fini effect on the Republikaner in the coming elections but also 
the possibility that Italy might play a bad joke on the 
economy--for example, by making agreements with Alcatel 
concerning STET [Turin Telephone Finance Company] while ignoring 
Siemens. Bonn is preparing to preside over the EC for six months 
and will keep close watch on Rome--on Rome's observance of its 
European commitments and on its compliance with the rules of 
economic and moral austerity that are necessary in order to 
solve Italy's serious problems. Slovenes and Croats have turned 
not only to Washington but also to Bonn to obtain protection 
from any revision of the Osimo Treaty ("which," Fini told 
PANORAMA, "must be revised as it pertains to the protection of 
the rights of the Italian minorities." 
  London--where Italy is represented by an ambassador of great 
prestige, Giacomo Attolico--is not monitoring the handful of 
National Alliance ministers as attentively as it is 
"Berlusconi's performance." It is up to him, the newspapers 
explain--and the Foreign Office chimes in--to keep "the 
postneofascists" at bay. The British ambassador in Rome, Sir 
Patrick Fairweather, met privately with Fini precisely in an 
effort to understand him. On Monday 2 May, at the Italian 
Cultural Institute in London, a crowded meeting of political 
scientists and analysts heard a lecture on the new Italy given 
by Professor Carlo Maria Santoro of the ISPI [Foreign Policy 
Studies Institute] of Milan. At the meeting, attention was 
centered on the new electoral system and on the new government 
coalition. PANORAMA has learned that Prince Charles will invite 
Berlusconi to visit him at his private country estate, 
Highgrove, outside London, and Prime Minister John Major has 
sent a message to Berlusconi expressing "best wishes for the 
formation of your ministerial team." 
  Whereas London is merely smiling, the face that Paris and 
Brussels (where the Frenchman Jacques Delors reigns) have turned 
toward this "black-garbed" Italy is wearing a frown. The 
transalpine press--except for LE FIGARO--is decidedly hostile. 
Even some conservative politicians such as the mayor of Paris, 
Jacques Chirac, are unusually cautious (on his recent visit to 
Rome, Chirac did not want to meet with any National Alliance 
representative). Francois Mitterrand sent Berlusconi a telegram 
of congratulations, and his foreign minister, Alain Juppe, 
displayed a measure of realpolitik toward the new Italian 
Government. The Socialists, however, have gone wild. Jean-Pierre 
Cot, group leader of the Socialists in the European Parliament, 
led the anti-Fini campaign. Former cabinet minister Bernard 
Kouchner headed a drive to collect signatures in opposition to 
"Italian neofascism." In the intellectual salons of the Left, 
Italy--which had just held normal democratic elections--was in 
fact likened to the Greece of the colonels and the Chile of 
Augusto Pinochet. 
  Even the Jewish communities reacted strongly to the "Fini 
threat." Jean Kahn, president of the European Jewish Congress, 
said: "The European Community was created on the basis of the 
European Human Rights Convention, and it would be unacceptable 
for the fascists to be part of a government of the EU." Like a 
chain reaction, the alarm sounded by the French Jews unleashed 
the powerful lobby [preceding word in English] in America. 
"These events concern and disturb me very greatly," Fini told 
PANORAMA. "I have already had a heart-to-heart talk with many 
Jewish friends, and will do the same with the Italian, American, 
and French communities. If it can be arranged, I will even go to 
Israel. I say to everyone that we are not anti-Semites and that 
we love freedom and democracy." 
  The conservative Israeli daily JERUSALEM POST indicates that 
it believes Fini is acting in good faith. In an editorial of 31 
March it wrote: "He is a courteous person, who became the center 
of attention after combating the extremist fringe of his party. 
He is certainly no Zhirinovskiy." Shimon Peres, who met 
Berlusconi in 1985, is monitoring the Italian situation with 
Biblical realism and is awaiting [Foreign Minister] Martino's 
visit to Israel. Italy has been scrutinized attentively in 
Jerusalem as well as in Washington. The Western foreign 
ministries--more so than the newspapers--have concentrated on 
reality rather than on their imagination. They are waiting for 
the names of the ministers and the program of the government to 
be announced. 
  As Margaret Thatcher has informed PANORAMA, the following 
will be of great importance for the world and also for Italy: 
the actions that Berlusconi takes during the first 100 days, the 
first promises that are carried out, and the day-to-day 
performance of the ministers of the coalition regardless of 
their political affiliation. And if the Iron Lady--who governed 
for 11 and one-half years--says so, it is indeed good advice. 

</TEXT>

</DOC>
