ID: 80	RANK: 3	SCORE: 10.1086
<DOC>
<DOCNO>FT921-4719</DOCNO>
<PROFILE>_AN-CCGADADCFT</PROFILE>
<DATE>920307
</DATE>
<HEADLINE>
FT  07 MAR 92 / Books: Parlour games, not politics
</HEADLINE>
<BYLINE>
   By MARK ARCHER
</BYLINE>
<TEXT>
BEATRICE WEBB: WOMAN OF CONFLICT by Carole Seymour-Jones Allison &amp; Busby
Pounds 17.99, 369 pages
HISTORY has not been kind to Beatrice Webb. Revered by her first two
biographers, the correction came with Kitty Muggeridge's 1967 depiction of
her 'aunt Bo' as a puritanical Fabian social reformer who, with her husband
Sidney, wrote 'unreadable books' and approved of Stalin's Russia because
there was no 'spooning' in the parks. Now Carole Seymour-Jones gives her
excellent new biography a feminist tinge: Beatrice's story is a 'very modern
one' because it is a 'story of choices'. The result is to make Beatrice's
life memorable more for the contradictions it embodied than for the reforms
it achieved.
Born in 1858, one of eight daughters, Beatrice grew up in a free-thinking
household where her father Richard Potter, a rich railway magnate, included
Thomas Huxley and Herbert Spencer among his friends. Already questioning the
'repugnant' doctrine of Atonement at the age of sixteen, like many
Victorians she lost her faith but found a calling, following her elder
sister Kate into the service of Octavia Hill, the model housing pioneer in
London's East End. Women's Suffrage and reform of the Poor Laws were burning
issues of the day, and Seymour-Jones's social history teems with
descriptions of personalities and pressure-groups, vividly conveying the
social and intellectual ferment surrounding Beatrice's choice of life.
Agonising in her diary between marriage and independence, motherhood or good
works, the severest test to Beatrice's passionate nature came from Joseph
Chamberlain, the charismatic leader of the Radicals in the 1880s. The
physical infatuation, unfulfilled, lasted six years and brought her to the
brink of nervous collapse: 'If I were a man,' she told herself, 'this
creature would be free, though not dissolute, in its morals, a lover of
women . . . the strong physical nature upon which the intellectual nature is
based would be satisfied.'
Too volatile for Chamberlain's needs, in Sidney Webb, the unprepossessing
son of a Cockney hairdresser, she found someone whose socialist beliefs were
at least a match for her mind if not her heart: 'I do not even look at your
photographs,' she told him when he sat for a new photograph, 'It is too
hideous, for anything. Do be done in a gray suit and let me have your head
only - it is the head only I am marrying]' Submitting to Beatrice's
elocution lessons Sidney played his one trump card, his intellectual
ambition, to perfection - his wife's in-bred belief that men ruled and women
supported had earlier led her to sign Mrs Humphrey Ward's Anti-Suffrage
Appeal in 1889.
In the event, the Fabianism which the Webbs, with George Bernard Shaw,
founded was elitist, anti-democratic and more a patrician parlour-game than
a political power base. They misread the rise of the Labour movement, which
was to mark their eclipse, likening themselves instead to a Samurai 'elect'
who would do the thinking for the untutored masses. Beatrice's taste for the
good life never left her; after dinner parties spent 'webb-pulling' (as
their enemies termed it) with the likes of Balfour, Asquith and Ramsey
Macdonald, she would scribble down the seating plan in her diary as a
trophy.
Soviet Communism: A New Civilisation?, the pamphlet they published following
their visit to Russia in 1932, when Beatrice was 74, proved a lamentable
curtain-call. Ignoring protests from former disciples Beatrice thought the
1931-2 Russian famine a 'partial crop failure' and dismissed Stalin's
show-trials as merely the 'growing pains' of a new civilisation. Depressed
by the apparent collapse of worldwide capitalism, the Webbs' enthusiasm for
Stalin's elitist new order was fuelled by a strangely inhuman quality in
themselves, which led them to ignore individual suffering in favour of the
needs of the State ('Sidney tends to ignore personalities and I study them
as specimens,' she once wrote).
In her personal life, despite regrets over lost motherhood, Beatrice's
fevered spirit did at last gain a restfulness ('It is very sweet, this warm
companionship in work'). Their ashes now lie in Westminster Abbey, the only
couple to be so honoured. It is typically English tribute to two heroic
failures.
</TEXT>
<PUB>The Financial Times
</PUB>
<PAGE>
London Page XVIII
</PAGE>
</DOC>
