ID: 9	RANK: 49	SCORE: 8.8002

<DOC>
<DOCNO> FBIS3-47851 </DOCNO>
<HT>    "dreas011_d_94005" </HT>


<HEADER>
<AU>   FBIS-EAS-94-011 </AU>
Document Type:Daily Report 
<DATE1>  18 Jan 1994 </DATE1>

</HEADER>

<F P=100> South Korea </F>
<H3> <TI>   U.S. Ambassador's Associates View Relationships </TI></H3>
<F P=102>  942C0049A Seoul SINDONG-A in Korean Dec 93 pp 438-451 </F>
<F P=103> 942C0049A </F>
<F P=104>  Seoul SINDONG-A </F>


<TEXT>
Language: <F P=105> Korean </F>
Article Type:CSO 

<F P=106> [By reporter Chi Chae-won] </F>
  [Excerpts] "... I have had inseparable ties with Korea 
since my first visit in 1947." [passage omitted] 
  This is part of the address--delivered in Korean--by James 
T. 
Laney, 66, the new U.S. ambassador to Korea, at a "welcome 
reception" held in his honor at Hyatt Hotel on 5 November. His 
Korean was impeccable except that he pronounced "Hanguk" [Korea] 
like "Hank'uk" and "yeoro kaji" [various or many] like "yoro 
kaji." [passage omitted] 
  About 20 days later, on 2 July, the White House officially 
announced the appointment of Laney. After the Senate 
confirmation process, the new ambassador presented his 
credentials to President Kim Yong-sam on 2 November. Thus, he 
embarked on his ambassadorial activity 4 months after the White 
House announcement. That day, President Kim asked him "when we 
met in the past, did you think that someday I would be the 
president and you would be the ambassador to Korea?" Ambassador 
Laney responded, "I thought that you would someday be the 
president but I never thought of myself to be the ambassador." 
The president laughed. 
  The 5 November reception, held under the auspices of the 
Methodist Church Headquarters of Korea, was attended by some 350 
guests invited from political, business, Christian and academic 
communities. [passage omitted] It was unusually quick that a 
private-level reception in honor of a new U.S. ambassador was 
held 15 days after his arrival and only 3 days after he 
presented his credentials, and that it was attended by so many 
"private" guests as well as public officials. [passage omitted] 
  Addressing the reception, Pyo Yong-un [Methodist Church 
Headquarters Superintendent] said that "It was exciting when we 
heard the news about Dr Laney--whom we love and respect--coming 
as the ambassador." Expressing his hopes, Pyo stated that "Dr 
Laney loves Korea and his relationship with us has a long 
history. His arrival as U.S. ambassador to Korea means a 
tremendous contribution to furthering friendship between the two 
nations and to their attaining the common goal." 
  Among the guests that day were, from the Administration, Kim 
Chol-su, minister of trade, industry and resources; Yi Min-sop, 
minister of culture and sports; Hwang San-song, minister of 
environment; Song Yong- tae, vice minister of the Unification 
Board, and Yi Hong-ku, vice chairman of the Advisory Council for 
Democratic Peaceful Unification, and from the political circles, 
Assemblymen Yi Se-ki, Yi Chae-hwan, Son Hak-kyu and Pak Hui-pu 
of the Democratic Liberal Party [DLP], Yi U- chong, Cho 
Sun-sung, Pak Sil of the Democratic Party [DP], and Kim 
Chong-kil, chairman of the United People's Party [UPP], Yun 
Yong-tak and Yim Chun-won, independents. The guests also 
included Yi Chol-sung and Min Kwan-sik, senior politicians; Yi 
Tae-yong, director of the Family Legal Information Center; Cho 
Kyong-hui, chief director of the Palace of Arts; Cho Sang-ho, 
former minister of sports; Kim Yong-nae, former Seoul mayor; Yi 
Yong-tok, chairman of the government's Public Officials Ethics 
Committee, and Yi Se-chung, chairman of the Korea Bar 
Association. The Rev. Mun Ik-wan and the Rev. Pak Hyong-kyu, 
both chaeya [reformist camp] veterans, were also 
present, drawing attention. Mun Ik-hwan has known Laney since 
the 1960's when the latter was a missionary in Korea. "I am very 
happy to have as the U.S. ambassador a person who knows about 
Korea better than any other Americans," Mun said. [passage 
omitted] 
  Deputy Prime Minister Han Wan-sang, who some newspapers 
reported was the prime mover for the gathering, was not present. 
Explaining, he said that "for reasons involving the strained 
North-South relations, I could not attend the reception. I 
expressed my regret to the office of superintendent of the 
Methodist Church Headquarters. I am sure that for our deep 
friendship, Ambassador Laney would understand it." 
  Han drew most attention from media when the Laney 
appointment 
was announced. The relationship of the two dates back to the 
early 1970's when Han was a chaeya activist and the 
general manager of the Christian Professors Conference, a group 
of critical intellectuals. He read a declaration on the state of 
the country at a gathering held on 1 March 1975 to welcome Kim 
Tong-kil and Kim Chan-kuk of the group who were just released 
form prison. As he actively participated in pro- democracy 
movements, the relationship deepened, Han says. 
  "It was my days of sufferings. I was arrested and detained 
several times. With humane concerns for me in that situation, Mr 
Laney did many things to help me. When I was taken into custody 
again in 1980, he, then president of Emory U., led an effort for 
arranging my U.S. visit. On my release in November that year, I 
was invited to Emory U. as an exchange professor. I stayed on 
until I returned to my position in Seoul National University 
[SNU] in September 1984. During the years, Mr Laney looked after 
my family, too, with the greatest possible care." 
  Deputy Prime Minister Han describes Ambassador Laney as a 
"man of the oriental sense of love and humanity." In addition, 
as his tremendous accomplishments for Emory U. show, Han says, 
he is known for his outstanding administrative ability. As 
ambassador, he will "play a great role in furthering Korea-U.S. 
relations," he adds, "because he loves our country and has his 
unique experience in contributing to its democracy." 
  Han saw Laney in July during his U.S. visit to attend an 
information exchange meeting. At the time, Laney, then the 
ambassador designate, reportedly said to Han that "From now on, 
I will be working for the national interests of the United 
States and you are in the position to work for the national 
interests of Korea. But let's cooperate, relying on God's will." 
Han, who is also a faithful Presbyterian, denied the reported 
references to "national interests." They only shared 
conversations on "cooperating for the peace, well-being and 
unification of the Korean Peninsula," he said. 
  Pak Pong-pae, 62, president of Mogwon U., is known to have 
done the actual work of arranging the Laney reception. A 
graduate of MTC, Pak studied at Boston U., and later at 
Vanderbilt U., taking his master's and doctor's degrees there. 
  Pak says: "I first met the Rev. Laney in 1959, when I was 
living in a missionary's home to learn about American life to 
prepare for my study in the United States. One day the 
missionary told me that `a new missionary has come from the 
United States. Let's go and see him.' That was Rev. Laney. I saw 
him in the missionary's quarters called "Guest House" in West 
Gate. We felt close friendship with each other the minute we 
met. We have since been like real brothers." 
  On his return to Korea, Pak found a position as an MTC 
professor. After serving as its rector, he became the president 
of Mogwon U. He continued to invite Laney to Korea all these 
years. [passage omitted] 
  On the relationship between President Kim Yong-sam and 
Ambassador Laney, Pak Pong-pae says: 
  "President Kim visited Emory U., in 1984 or 85 in my memory. 
I was then working there as an exchange professor. It was the 
first time they met each other. Mr Laney invited President Kim, 
then leader of an opposition party, to a dinner at his 
residence. Also, under arrangements made by him, President Kim 
made a speech to students under the title "Democratization of 
Korea." When Mr Laney visited Korea in early 1990, he was 
scheduled to see Kim Yong-sam, then chairman of the DLP but the 
meeting did not materialize because the later was in Masan in 
the aftermath of a political upheaval touched off by a 
memorandum concerning the controversial cabinet system plan. I 
understand that Ambassador Laney is deeply impressed by 
President Kim's leadership and reform program." 
  Pak also said that he understands that Laney's relationship 
with former DP President Kim Tae-chung has become increasingly 
closer since the Kim Tae-chung kidnapping incident. Laney was 
particularly concerned over the incident. Emory conferred an 
honorary doctorate in law on Kim in June 1983. It also gave his 
son, Hong-kol, an opportunity to study at the university. Deputy 
Prime Minister Han Wan-sang's two daughters and former Rep. Mun 
Tong-hwan's son also studied at Emory through the good offices 
of Ambassador Laney. [passage omitted] 
  In terms of school ties alone, Yi Hong-ku [First Vice 
Chairman of the Advisory Council for Democratic Peaceful 
Unification] is closest to Laney. He was once Emory professor 
and even received an honorary doctorate in literature. Moreover, 
Yi served as chairman of the Yale alumni association in Korea 
for 10 years. Yale is Laney's alma mater. [passage omitted] 
  According to him, Laney is "a liberal who has long been 
showing a great deal of concern about democratization and human 
rights." His arrival as U.S. ambassador, he says, should be 
viewed as meaning the opening of a new era in Korea-U.S. 
relations. 
  He continued: "Democratization, human rights, the Cold 
War--all these things are over now. U.S. ambassadors to Korea in 
the past were all specialists in security. The fact itself that 
a scholar, not a career diplomat, was appointed to that post 
shattered the tradition. As in the case of Mondale, the 
ambassador to Japan, the Laney appointment suggests that the 
U.S. Government attaches greater importance to Korea. Korea- 
U.S. relations have entered a 'new era,' I believe." 
  Meanwhile, among Laney's circles of acquaintances in Korea, 
there is a group almost unknown to the public but very 
deep-rooted and thriving in every way. It is Club VV--VV stands 
for veneratio vitae in Latin meaning "reverence for life." It is 
a group of Christian students assembled to uphold the great 
spirit of Dr Albert Schweitzer, who was a physician, missionary, 
philosopher, musician and writer. Currently, its graduate 
members alone number more than 900. In particular, all the 
80-odd members from the early days are still meeting regularly, 
they say. The representative of the graduate chapter is Prof. 
Chon Se-il of Yonsei U., who is the director of the 
rehabilitation clinic of the university hospital. [passage 
omitted] 
  Laney, seeing the club as a kind of "spiritual movement," 
has 
continued to show great interest in it since his arrival this 
time. Chairman Chon Se-il explains that he is doing so because 
the club's activities conform to his thought and philosophy. 
  Club VV has its office in Miju Plaza Building in Kuro-tong, 
Seoul. They are said to be planning to start a new group led by 
graduate members before the year-end. 
  The Laney network also includes the Korean Student Christian 
Council (KSCC). Among its leading figures are O Chae-sik, former 
director of the WCC [World Council of Churches] Third Bureau; 
Kang Mun-kyu, YMCA secretary general; Pak Sang-chung, director 
of the Korea Institute of Christian Social Affairs. [passage 
omitted] 
  O Chae-sik, graduate of the SNU religious department, left 
Korea together with the Rev. Laney in 1964, the latter's 
sabbatical year. Then, they both studied in Yale U. graduate 
school of theology, Laney in the doctor's course and O Chae-sik 
in the master's. O continues: 
  "At the time, the Rev. Laney told me that he would not 
return 
to Korea at the end of his sabbatical leave. His judgement was 
that churches in Korea had grown and no longer needed the help 
of missionaries. He said that he would help Korea working in the 
United States. And he kept his word." 
  On his return home 2 years later, O Chae-sik joined YMCA and 
took part in the effort for the merger of KSCM and the YMCA and 
YWCA college chapters. The three groups were finally merged and 
KSCF (Korea Student Christian Federation) was born in 1968. O 
Chae-sik became the head of its secretariat. Laney was greatly 
helpful in this process, O recalled. 
  Subsequently, O Chae-sik served as director of the training 
center of the Korea National Council of Churches (NCC-K) and 
director of the international department of the Asian Council of 
Churches. Then, after serving successively as the director of 
the WCC Development Bureau and its Third Bureau in Geneva since 
1988, he returned to Korea in June. 
  According to O, it is true that Laney greatly contributed to 
the founding of KSCF but had no particular relationship with 
WCC. He says: 
  "Even after he left Korea 30 years ago, the Rev. Laney has 
always been with us. And he has shown more concern and affection 
for the young people rather than the older generation. He always 
inspired them with courage, helping them with all he had 
whenever they needed help while expecting nothing in return. In 
the past, he had close friends among Korean politicians and 
chaeya personages, sometimes giving them a helping 
hand. I believe that it was a natural thing for him coming from 
his faith. As an ambassador now, he is assigned a political 
role. I am hoping wholeheartedly that he will be able to fully 
display his strength in that capacity, too." [passage omitted] 
  There is a joke in diplomatic quarters: "An ambassador would 
not even tee off on a golf course without first getting an 
instruction from his home government." The message is that all 
ambassadors are expected to act as instructed by their home 
governments and work in the interests of their respective 
countries. As public attention is concentrated on the new U.S. 
ambassador, Mr "L," a diplomat in active service, warns that 
there is a need for people to view things in a more cool-headed 
manner. A Korean worker at the U.S. Embassy also says that "the 
arrival of a pro-Korean personality as the ambassador does not 
mean a change in the basic U.S. policy or position." [passage 
omitted] 
  The well known Laney network in Korea is apparently 
dominated 
by Christians. His acquaintances in political and business 
circles are mostly Christians. Considering that he had been a 
minister--he retired from clergy prior to taking his 
ambassadorial post--and that he had worked as a missionary, it 
is a natural outcome. But how he will cope with the fact will 
also be noteworthy. 
  On the day he presented his credentials, there was an 
anti-U.S., Molotov cocktail-throwing demonstration in Kwangju, 
the first since the launching of the Kim Yong-sam government. 
The unresolved nuclear issue and the remaining anti-U.S. 
sentiment are the major tasks confronting Ambassador Laney. 
[passage omitted] 
  As for the successive U.S. ambassadors to Korea in the past, 
Koreans have a negative image of them all. The biggest reason is 
that they behaved as if they were the "governor general" sent to 
this country. The rulers of the military dictatorial regimes in 
the past--which the people never recognized as truly 
legitimate--were compelled to depend heavily on the United 
States to keep their regimes in power, no matter whether they 
liked it or not. Consequently, one cannot deny that they were 
more or less responsible for the role of the U.S. ambassador 
that "departed from its normal path." Any U.S. ambassador coming 
to Korea--even if he was not an ex-CIA official--perhaps could 
not but involve himself in interference with Korea's domestic 
affairs and covert operations. 
  A known political figure says that the U.S. foreign policy 
toward Korea has been "blank." What he means is that Washington 
was barred from the normal conduct of foreign policy toward a 
dictatorial regime and, as a result, Korea remained nothing more 
than a military strategic region more under the sway of the 
Pentagon rather than that of the State Department--and a void as 
far as foreign policy was concerned. 
  The launching of the civilian government has, in effect, 
paved the way for the office of U.S. ambassador to recover its 
"normal" role. It means that Ambassador Laney's role will 
inevitably be different from the one his predecessors played. 
Therefore, it can be said that ratings on Ambassador Laney are 
linked directly with the question of how much Korea will improve 
its status as a U.S. foreign policy partner. 


</TEXT>

</DOC>
