ID: 54	RANK: 29	SCORE: 13.3578

<DOC>
<DOCNO> FBIS3-61010 </DOCNO>
<HT>    "jpuac001___94008" </HT>


<HEADER>
<AU>   JPRS-UAC-94-001 </AU>
Document Type:JPRS 
Document Title:Central Eurasia 

</HEADER>

<ABS>  AVIATION AND COSMONAUTICS No 2, February 1993 </ABS>
<DATE1>   3 January 1994 </DATE1>
<F P=100></F>
<H3> <TI>     History of Soviet Lunar Program After N1-L3 </TI></H3>
<F P=102>  93UM0679H Moscow AVIATSIYA I KOSMONAVTIKA in Russian No 2, 
Feb 93 (signed to press 9 Feb 92) pp 42-44 </F>

<F P=103> 93UM0679H </F>
<F P=104>  Moscow AVIATSIYA I KOSMONAVTIKA </F>


<TEXT>
Language: <F P=105> Russian </F>
Article Type:CSO 

<F P=106> [Article by I. Afanasyev under the rubric "By Reader </F>
Request": "The `Lunar Theme' After N1-L3"] 
  [Text] Readers of our journal who have become 
familiar with the N1-L3 project (AVIATSIYA I KOSMONAVTIKA No. 12 
of 1991 and Nos. 1, 2 and 9 of 1992) have noted that the story 
of the Soviet lunar program was seemingly broken off in 
midsentence. Taking into account the wishes of I. Konyukhov from 
Leningrad Oblast and R. Gnatyuk from Ukraine, among others, we 
are continuing to cover the work on lunar topics that was 
conducted in the USSR after the events described earlier. 
  V. Mishin, who headed the Central Design Bureau for 
Experimental Machine Building [TsKBEM] after the death of S. 
Korolev, facilitated the pursuit of the lunar program with all 
of his strength. But the leadership of the sector and the 
country, under the impact of the successful landing on the moon 
by the American astronauts, felt the accomplishment of the N1-L3 
project in its initial version to be without prospects. The 
rapid shutdown of the program did not follow, however, owing to 
the enormous amount of work that had already been done, even 
though the financing and pace were reduced sharply. They were 
evidently still nursing the hope "on high" that something would 
throw off the Americans, and then it would be possible to make 
up what had been omitted and "jump ahead" with a vigorous push. 
  The aimlessness and ambiguity of this position were obvious. 
In order not to lose accumulated experience and simultaneously 
to reach the assigned goal--to land on the moon--the TsKBEM 
developed, at the suggestion of V. Mishin, a variation of a 
lunar space-rocket system--the N1-L3M. It was broadly proposed 
to speed up the N-1 launch vehicle and create a new ship for the 
flight according to an original, dual-launch system. The 
preparation of the necessary infrastructure for the emplacement 
of a lunar base in the not-too-distant future and the 
performance of expeditions of moderate duration (up to three 
months) was planned, instead of short-term visits to the surface 
of the "night luminary." It turned out that a real possibility 
of the fulfillment of the new program could appear as early as 
1978-80, and under financing that did not go beyond the bounds 
of the budgetary appropriations for the N1-L3. 
  The insufficient reliability of the docking of the lunar 
orbital craft (LOK) with the lunar craft (LK) launched from the 
surface of the moon was deemed to be one of the weakest areas of 
the N1-L3 project. The fault for that was the poor capabilities 
of the electronic systems of the craft, the insufficient extent 
of the study of the conditions of navigation close to the moon 
and the impossibility of giving the cosmonauts comprehensive and 
prompt support from Earth, as was done in the docking of craft 
in near-Earth orbit. New approaches were required. 
  A flight according to the "direct configuration" without 
dockings in orbit would have been simple, but not economical. 
The whole ship makes the landing on the moon in that case. After 
the fulfillment of the research program, the returnable portion 
of the craft launches from the moon, while the re-entry craft 
(SA) separates from it as it approaches the Earth and enters the 
atmosphere with second escape velocity, with a controlled 
descent and parachute landing. A launch vehicle (RN), however, 
had to be created for such a flight, using even the simplest and 
lightest craft, that would have had approximately one and a half 
times the lift capacity of the N-1. 
  The possibilities for the gradual augmentation of the mass 
of 
the payload had been made inherent in the N-1 project from the 
very beginning, but only the acceleration of the first stage of 
the N-1--which would add only about 10--11 percent to the 
payload mass--was realistic in the near future. 
  It was thus decided to stick with a modified version of the 
"direct configuration," in which the lunar craft and the braking 
rocket unit would be launched into near-Earth orbit separately 
with their own N-1. Each would then first reach flight 
trajectory to the moon with the aid of its own starting and 
braking engines (RTB), and then selenocentric orbit where the 
docking would occur. If the docking were to fall through, the 
cosmonauts would return to Earth. The braking unit would be used 
for the descent of the LK from lunar orbit and to shed speed, 
and it would then separate at a certain height above the moon's 
surface. A soft landing took place with the aid of the engine 
installation (DU) and the landing struts of the LK. The 
separation of the landing adapter and liftoff with the engine of 
the LK operating at full thrust were necessary for return. The 
ship was to enter a selenocentric orbit after launch from the 
moon, from which it would take a heading toward Earth or shift 
at once onto a return trajectory. 
  The use of the "direct configuration" made it possible to 
equip the craft with a complicated system of more advanced radio 
gear for the precise and reliable performance of maneuvers 
connected with searching, meeting and docking in lunar orbit. 
Such a larger LK would moreover have had greater freedom of 
maneuver close to the surface to select a landing site. 
  The creation of some new elements of the system was 
envisaged 
in this project, along with the widespread utilization of the 
work that had been developed under the N1-L3 program. While a 
somewhat modified D unit from the L-3 could have been used as 
the braking unit, the craft itself and the RTB had to be created 
virtually anew. 
  The RTB, replacing the G unit and partially the D unit of 
the 
L-3 system in the N1-L3M project, was to become the first Soviet 
high-energy stage. The installation of four oxygen-hydrogen 
ZhRDs [liquid rocket engines] was proposed, and their 
development entrusted to the OKB [Experimental Design Bureau] of 
A. Isayev in the second half of the 1960s. And while only 
drawings had come out for the RTB, the ZhRDs were brought to the 
stage of live ground tests. The first Soviet cryogenic engine, 
built according to an improved, self-contained configuration, 
proved to be very economical and reliable. It surpassed the 
analogous American ZhRD, developed by the firm of Pratt and 
Whitney for the upper stage of the Atlas-Centaur launch vehicle. 
The design bureau continued to improve the engine despite the 
shutdown of the lunar program, making it competitive in the 
world markets. Several of the first flight models of this ZhRD 
and the technical documentation for its manufacture under 
license will thus be sent under contract to the India Space 
Agency. 
  The craft itself for the N1-L3M project was outwardly 
somewhat reminiscent of the L-3 LK system. It consisted of a DU 
that was, as a whole, analogous to the Ye unit of the LK of the 
L-3 project, with the lunar landing installation attached 
underneath and the cocoon-shaped habitation module (OB) above. 
The engines of the DU were backed up, operated on long-term 
storable, self-igniting fuel and had the capability of thrust 
regulation across a broad spectrum. The OB had the re-entry 
craft, with an airtight instrument compartment in the lower 
portion. The cosmonauts were to leave the SA and operate within 
the internal spaces of the OB during various operations in 
flight and on the lunar surface, providing not only freedom of 
access to the control instruments but also a good view, easing 
the choice of landing site. The separation of the OB and the 
departure of the SA from it occurred when approaching the Earth. 

<FIG ID=JPRS-UAC-001C-21A>           N-1F, Vulkan and Energiya </FIG>





    After the successful completion of th Apollo program, the 
Soviet lunar project lost its prestige in whatever form it was. 
Money for the N1-L3M variation was not allocated. The program to 
assimilate the moon was moreover re-oriented toward unmanned 
flights, with a gradual reduction in the number of launches of 
automatic stations and the subsequent curtailment of that 
program under the slogan "The study of the moon is completely 
finished," owing to delays in the flight testing of the N-1 
rocket. 
  The work on the N1-L3 had effectively been reduced, under 
pressure from the Ministry of General Machine Building, to the 
development of the N1 rocket since the very beginning of the 
1970s, so as to at least create a launch vehicle. All four of 
its launches were unsuccessful, which had a depressing effect on 
the executors of the program and one of Schadenfreude 
for the opponents of the rocket, of which there were more than 
enough by that time. The creators of the N1 were being "called 
onto the carpet" more and more, and they had to prove their 
correctness each time. The rhythm of the work was disrupted 
owing to the confusion, and rumors were circulating in the 
corridors of the "firms" of the supposedly imminent "shutdown" 
of the N1. 
  The work on the N1 at the newly formed Energiya NPO 
[Scientific-Production Association] was curtailed completely a 
very short time after the removal of V. Mishin from the post of 
head of the TsKBEM and the designation of V. Glushko for the 
post in May of 1974. 
  Academician Glushko proposed the creation of a number of new 
launch vehicles even before coming to the TsKBEM, formed via the 
parallel combination of various quantities of standard units. He 
planned to install a ZhRD with a thrust of more than 1,000 
tonnes of force in each of them, in which all of the advanced 
ideas in the realm of engine building and the great experience 
of the GDL-OKB that he came from would be employed. 

<FIG ID=JPRS-UAC-001C-22A>           Lunar expeditionary craft </FIG>





    The specialists of the OKB of S. Korolev had criticized that 
idea as early as the beginning of the 1960s from the standpoint 
of the non-optimal division into stages, the utilization of 
toxic components and the lack of conformity to the criterion of 
cost-effectiveness. The academician, however, skillfully 
manipulating the terms "reusability" and "universality," 
convinced the leadership of the country of the necessity of 
replacing the N1 rocket, which had not proved itself, with a 
"universal series of reusable launch vehicles," which were to 
become the foundation of the new conceptual model of the space 
transport system of the USSR. The staffers of the department 
developing the N1 spent a whole year after the designation of V. 
Glushko to the post of head of the Energiya NPO trying to prove 
to the new general director the irrationality of creating a new 
generation of launch vehicles. He was implacable, however, and 
in October 1974, submitting a comprehensive plan for the 
association for the next few years, he gave it to be clearly 
understood that there was no place in it for the N1. But the 
developers did not get started on the design engineering of such 
a system, reminiscent of the Glushko "series" only in the most 
general outlines, until 1976. 
  One could have thought that V. Glushko shut down the lunar 
program, but that is not so. He "killed" just the launch 
vehicle. The academician had an entirely different opinion of 
the lunar program. One of the paragraphs in his 1974 
comprehensive plan envisaged the creation of a long-term 
scientific-research base on the moon. V. Glushko proposed the 
lunar expeditionary craft (LEK) as the principal means of 
transport for delivering cosmonauts and payloads. He proposed it 
instead with the colossal Vulkan launch vehicle. The new rocket, 
which went beyond the prior notions of Glushko, was clearly 
inferior to the N1 in aesthetic terms, even though it won out in 
characteristics. It had a launch mass roughly 60 percent greater 
than the N1, could insert a payload of 200 tonnes into 
near-Earth orbit or deliver 54 tonnes to Venus and 52 tonnes to 
Mars. The delivery of the LEK to a selenocentric orbit was 
proposed to be accomplished using the Vezuviy cryogenic unit 
using an oxygen-hydrogen ZhRD with small thrust but high 
specific impulse. 


N-1F, Vulkan and Energiya Launch Vehicles 

Characteristics of the    N-1F            Vulkan           Energiya 
launch vehicles 

Launch thrust,            5,070           7,520            3,600 
tonnes-force 

Launch mass, tonnes       3,025           4,700            2,400 

Payload mass: 

--in near-Earth orbit,    105             200              102 
tonnes 

--to fly to moon,         34              65               35 
tonnes 

--for lunar orbit,        22              43               23 
tonnes 


  The LEK was created to perform an expedition according to a 
purely "direct configuration," and consisted of three 
units--landing and liftoff stages and a habitation module. The 
landing stage, equipped with a powerful main and four steering 
ZhRDs, was reminiscent in configuration to the eight-sided 
descent stage of the Apollo lunar module. The OB and the liftoff 
stage were similar to those units on the N1-L3M. 
  One version of the expedition would have the crew launched 
in 
an SA located inside the habitable unit of the LEK. The launch 
of the crew to an unmanned LEK, with the subsequent docking of 
the craft and transfer of the cosmonauts to the OB of the lunar 
craft, using a Soyuz placed in orbit separately was proposed, 
however. The flight of the LEK was otherwise standard for the 
"direct configuration": launch from near-Earth orbit and entry 
into lunar orbit with the aid of the Vezuviy RTB, then 
separation of the LEK from the empty unit and descent to the 
surface with the aid of the engines in the descent stage. Later, 
after the cosmonauts had concluded their business on the moon, 
the takeoff stage was to put the OB onto a flight trajectory to 
Earth using its own engine. The SA would separate from the OB 
before entry into the atmosphere. 
  The country's leadership had no enthusiasm whatsoever for 
the 
"new" lunar program, and did not rush to allocate funds to 
implement the plans of V. Glushko. The task of creating a 
reusable transport craft that faced domestic space science in 
those same years pushed the projects on lunar topics into the 
background. Glushko tried to convince the "higher-ups" of the 
necessity of financing the program to assimilate the moon until 
the very last days of his life, but he was not able to do so, 
even though the development of individual portions of the system 
reached the preliminary design engineering stage. 
  In answering the question of whether the possibility of 
manned flights to the moon exists today, one may say that the 
Energiya space-rocket system, even in its current state, makes 
it possible to send a craft to the moon that is greater in mass 
than the L3. Today, however, there are neither realistic plans 
for such craft nor the financial underpinnings for such 
expeditions. 
  COPYRIGHT: "Aviatsiya i kosmonavtika", 1993. 

</TEXT>

</DOC>
