ID: 21	RANK: 14	SCORE: 10.8911

<DOC>
<DOCNO> FBIS3-52053 </DOCNO>
<HT>    "drlat019__a94018" </HT>


<HEADER>
<AU>   FBIS-LAT-94-019-A </AU>
Document Type:Daily Report 
<DATE1>  28 January 1994 </DATE1>

</HEADER>

<F P=100> ANNEX </F>
<F P=101> Cuba </F>
<H3> <TI>   Article Praises New Honduran Administration </TI></H3>
<F P=102>  PA1601185994 Havana PRENSA LATINA in Spanish 0411 GMT 15 Jan 
94--FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY </F>

<F P=103> PA1601185994 </F>
<F P=104>  Havana PRENSA LATINA </F>


<TEXT>
Language: <F P=105> Spanish </F>
Article Type:BFN 

<F P=106> [Article by PRENSA LATINA Columnist Nils Castro, a </F>
Panamanian political leader and journalist: "Actions Speak for 
Themselves"] 
  [Text] Following the election of Carlos Roberto Reina, who 
will take office this month with the support of a considerable 
legislative majority, another event confirms that changes are 
brewing in Honduras that will keep that forgotten country in the 
newspaper headlines over the next few months. At present, the 
issue is the unexpected scope of the report entitled Actions 
Speak for Themselves, presented by National Human Rights 
Commissioner Leonardo Valladares. Valladares' dramatic 
revelations, which involve former governments as well as current 
military chiefs and oligarchic leaders, were made right after 
the president-elect announced his risky plan to downsize the 
Army, which aroused the resistance of his high command. 
  According to the report, between 1979 and 1990, ranking 
civilian and military officials were heavily involved in a 
"dirty war" that included the organization and concealment of 
death squads responsible for the "disappearance" of at least 184 
citizens detained for political reasons. These crimes -- among 
other atrocities of various types -- were carried out in 
accordance with the so-called "National Security Doctrine" 
during the lengthy period when the U.S. administrations of 
Ronald Reagan and George Bush intervened in Honduran 
governments, rendering the country a veritable "aircraft 
carrier" for policies implemented by Washington on the Central 
American isthmus. 
<H5>  Multinational Terrorism </H5>
  These murders -- perpetrated with the advice and 
participation of Argentine soldiers, Nicaraguan contras, and 
U.S. agents -- took place under the military government of 
Policarpo Paz Garcia (1976- 81) and during the civilian 
presidencies of liberals Roberto Suazo Cordoba (1982-86) and 
Jose Azcona Hoyo (1986-90). General Paz Garcia culminated the 
series of military governments that Honduras endured throughout 
the seventies. Paz Garcia was a close ally of Anastasio 
Somoza's regime in Nicaragua. He later organized a constituent 
assembly that confirmed him in his post and regulated the 
transition to civilian rule, guaranteeing that civilian 
governments would exclusively favor the oligarchic leaders of 
the traditional Liberal and National Parties (conservative). 
  Gen. Paz Garcia's first successor, Suazo Cordoba, submitted 
his administration to U.S. policy, lent it for intervention 
against the Sandinist government and the Salvadoran 
revolutionary process, and passed an "antiterrorist law" that 
prohibited strikes and gave free rein to paramilitary groups. 
During his term, Honduras tolerated the permanent establishment 
of U.S. troops and contra bases in its territory -- 
approximately 15,000 men -- as well as an extraordinary increase 
in the size and cost of the Honduran Army, which doubled the 
number of troops and acquired a modern air force. Approximately 
1,200 Americans provided training and logistic support, 
participating directly in military operations in addition to 
organizing provocative "joint" maneuvers with the participation 
of up to 7,000 U.S. troops. 
  The management of the huge foreign military "aid" generated 
widespread corruption within the Armed Forces as well as in 
traditional political circles. This continued throughout the 
term of Azcona Hoyo, who developed a plan for privatization and 
reduced public spending -- without affecting the military -- 
which ended in failure and dramatically harmed the country's 
social situation. Just as Suazo had in the past, Azcona also 
maintained the oligarchy's control over the Liberal Party, 
preventing the development of different political options within 
the organization. Subjected to a plan for Nicaragua and El 
Salvador that was foreign to Honduras, the country's economic, 
political, and moral structures were profoundly deformed. 
  Such frustrations led to the election in 1989 of 
conservative 
Rafael Callejas, now the outgoing president. Following the 
liberals' defeat and transfer to the opposition, there emerged 
within the liberal sector a more civilized trend of social 
democratic orientation headed by brothers Carlos Roberto and 
Jorge Arturo Reina. This trend won the elections in November 
despite the tenacious resistance of the traditional factions 
within their own party. 
  This caused an about-face explainable not only by the long 
years of perseverance and preaching by the Reinas but also by 
the high cost of the failed orthodox neoliberal policy 
implemented by the Callejas administration. There was also an 
abrupt change in Washington's position concerning Honduras: 
After profoundly deforming the country -- for the sake of its 
warlike priorities in Central America -- the Bush administration 
suddenly cut off "aid" to Tegucigalpa following the Sandinist 
defeat in 1990. 
  During Callejas' administration -- which intensified the 
economic "adjustment" initiated by Azcona -- corruption 
continued, there was no reinvestment in the productive sector, 
farm production decreased -- the country now imports corn and 
beans to ease the domestic shortage -- exports came to a 
standstill, the public sector deficit increased, rural laborers 
lost access to land, over one-third of the economically active 
population became unemployed or underemployed, the middle class 
was drastically impoverished, and the boundaries between poverty 
and total destitution were practically erased as low-income 
neighborhoods and social degradation spread. 
<H5>  Adjusting the Adjustment </H5>
  Within this context, one of the key issues of the Reinas' 
campaign was the demand for an "adjustment of the adjustment." 
They advocated an economic policy "with a human face" that 
would satisfy social needs instead of macroeconomic indexes -- 
an issue upon which the international financial organizations 
now agree in view of the threat of social upheaval in the 
country -- and a "moral revolution" to abolish corruption and 
reform policies to recover national sovereignty and bend the 
oligarchs' resistance to true democratization, which is 
essential just to maintain the Liberal Party's control in view 
of a predictable counteroffensive by its traditional sectors. 
  One of the most critical issues in this plan is a reduction 
of the Army's size and power and the creation of an attorney 
general's office to eliminate the Armed Forces' control over the 
police force. The president-elect boldly announced these plans 
as soon as his electoral victory was confirmed. Carlos Roberto 
Reina's position on the issue coincides with that of the current 
U.S. Administration, which, now that circumstances in Central 
America have changed, has acknowledged that the Honduran 
military has a poor human rights record. Reina also agrees with 
the demands of the international financial organizations, which 
have acknowledged that the Honduran Army is a burden on the 
country's public spending. 
  Nevertheless, several high command sources immediately 
expressed their opposition to these plans, thus providing a 
glimpse of the imminent conflict over the issue. It is under 
these circumstances that Commissioner Leonardo Valladares' 
report appeared. The report names some of the commanders as 
well as distinguished civilian members of the two 
oligarchic-liberal governments that preceded Azcona's as 
criminals or accessories, thus dealing a harsh blow to their 
plans to obstruct any changes. 
  Fervently supported by Honduran humanitarian organizations, 
the revealing document -- which implicates current Armed Forces 
Chief General Luis Alonso Discua -- was coldly received by 
spokesmen for the outgoing government and rejected by the 
military hierarchy. Military spokesman Colonel Napoleon Santos 
said that it is part of a "well organized" campaign "to 
discredit the institution by blaming us for things that cannot 
be proven." Another spokesman said the report is based on 
"statements to the media made by biased individuals or on rumors 
that are simply inconsistent." The Armed Forces announced that 
it will not open its archives on the missing persons to which 
Valladares had no access for his investigation. 
  Meanwhile, President Callejas came out in defense of 
impunity, saying that the civilian and military authorities 
involved cannot be legally prosecuted because they had already 
received a previous stay of proceedings for the same charges in 
the past decade. Upon learning of the lawsuit filed by the 
Committee of Relatives of Missing Detainees in Honduras 
requesting that Congress suspend Gen. Discua from his post so he 
can be prosecuted, Callejas added that Valladares' report "has 
no legal foundation and will not be pursued by the respective 
authorities." Callejas alleges that the initiative "revives 
hatred and opens old wounds." 
  The root of this concern lies in the fact that former 
President Ronald Reagan and his ambassador to Honduras, John 
Dimitri Negroponte, are among the people implicated by the 
commissioner and the humanitarian organizations. 
  The outgoing Congress avoided the request to suspend Discua. 
However, in response to public pressure, the Supreme Court of 
Justice ordered common courts in the areas where disappearances 
took place to begin proceedings and arranged for a group of 
prosecutors to examine the report to establish which cases will 
require penal action. Although the current conservative court 
is not trusted by the humanitarian organizations, the initiative 
is relevant because the next Congress -- controlled by liberals 
and strongly influenced by the Reina brothers -- will appoint 
new justices. 
  Meanwhile, the president-elect maintains that "Valladares' 
brave work constitutes an immense effort that cannot remain a 
temporary report." Reina pledged that the new government will 
work with determination to follow up on all of its implications. 
If that is the case, actions will speak for themselves and we 
will see changes of an increasingly democratic nature. 

</TEXT>

</DOC>
