ID: 9	RANK: 76	SCORE: 8.3302

<DOC>
<DOCNO> FBIS4-2 </DOCNO>
<HT>    "cr00000019394001" </HT>


<HEADER>
<DATE1>   3 April 1994 </DATE1>
FBIS 
FOREIGN MEDIA NOTE--FB PN 94-046--Mongolia 
<H3> <TI>      MONGOLIA:  KEY APPOINTMENTS, No 2, 1994 </TI></H3>

</HEADER>

<HT><F P=107><PHRASE>       MONGOLIA:  KEY APPOINTMENTS, No 2, 1994 </PHRASE></F></HT>



<TEXT>
This      FMN reports the names of one newly appointed ambassador, the 
recipients of five diplomatic title awards, three ministerial and 
six judicial appointees and the new State Security Administration 
press representative. 

   President Punsalmaagiyn Ochirbat appointed Dariyn Puntsag 
Mongolian ambassador extraordinary and plenipotentiary to the 
Republic of Cuba.  (Ulaanbaatar ARDYN ERH in Mongolian 15 Jan 94 p 

   The president also awarded the diplomatic title of ambassador 
extraordinary and plenipotentiary to O. Ochirbal, director of the 
European and American Desk of Ministry of Foreign Affairs, and the 
diplomatic titles of envoy extraordinary and plenipotentiary to the 
following: 

   L. Dabaagib, Mongolian ambassador extraordinary and 
plenipotentiary to the U.S.; 

   A. Tsolmon, Mongolian ambassador extraordinary and 
plenipotentiary to Germany; 

   D. Chuluundorj, director of the Press and Information Department 
of the Ministry of Foreign Relations;  and 

   L. Erdenechuluun, permanent Mongolian representative to the 
United Nations.  (ARDYN ERH 19 Jan 94 p 1) 

   At the conclusion of the 14 January 1994 meeting of the State 
Great Hural, the following changes in senior assignments were made 
as a result of restructuring the Mongolian government and merging 
ministries: 

   R. Sandalhan was relieved of his duties as minister of highways, 
transportation and communications and appointed minister of 
infrastructure development;  and 

   B. Jigjid was relieved of his former duties as minister of fuel 
and power and appointed minister of power, geology and mining. 

   With the abolishment of two ministries the following were 
relieved of their assignments: 

   T. Damiran as minister of construction and town planning;  and 

   D. Tsogbaatar as minister of geology and mineral resources. 
(ARDYN ERH 18 Jan 94 p 1) 

   The Government of Mongolia appointed Dagbadorjiyn Tserendorj 
deputy minister of culture.  (ARDYN ERH 22 Feb 94 p 2) 

   Based on the recommendation of the General Council of the Court, 
B. Batsangee was appointed judge for a Darhan City District People's 
Court and  B. Haldzad judge for a Dundgobi Aymag District People's 
Court, and N. Dulamsuren was released from his duties as a member of 
the Suhbaatar Aymag Court. 

   At the recommendation of the General Council of the Court based 
on paragraph 2 of Article 51 of the Constitution the following 
appointments were made: 

   J. Hashdorj and P. Tsengee as judges of the Supreme Court; and 

   N. Dulamsuren as Suhbaatar Aymag Appeals Court judge.  (ARDYN ERH 
15 Jan 94 p 1) 

   In accordance with an order of the State Security Administration, 
N. Tomorhuyag was appointed the press and information representative 
of the administration.  (ARDYN ERH 12 Jan 94 p 1) 

(AUTHOR:  MIAB/CISD.  QUESTIONS AND/OR COMMENTS, PLEASE CALL CHIEF, 
MILITARY/INTERNATIONAL AFFAIRS BRANCH, CIS DIVISION (703) 733-6375.) 
ENEAG/31 MAR/POLCHF/CIS DIVISION/ta 31/1915z mar 

</TEXT>

</DOC>
