ID: 9	RANK: 87	SCORE: 8.2259

<DOC>
<DOCNO> FBIS4-15560 </DOCNO>
<HT>    "drsov069_a_94027" </HT>


<HEADER>
<AU>   FBIS-SOV-94-069 </AU>
Daily Report 
<DATE1>  9 Apr 1994 </DATE1>

</HEADER>

<F P=100> RUSSIA INTERNATIONAL AFFAIRS </F>
<H3> <TI>   Kozyrev Interviewed on World, Domestic Issues </TI></H3>
<HT><F P=107><PHRASE>    Kozyrev Interviewed on World, Domestic Issues </PHRASE></F></HT>

<F P=102>   PM1104134794 Moscow KOMSOMOLSKAYA PRAVDA in Russian 9 Apr 94 
p 7 </F>

<F P=103> PM1104134794 </F>
<F P=104>  Moscow KOMSOMOLSKAYA PRAVDA </F>
<F P=105>  Russian </F>


<TEXT>
BFN 

<F P=106> [Interview with Russian Foreign Minister Kozyrev on board a </F>
Tu-134 by Nikolay Dolgopolov; date, precise location not given: 
"Conversation with Minister Kozyrev in the Heavens"] 
  [Excerpts] People in the West -- and, above all, at home 
-- have all been amazed at how Kozyrev has changed. There are 
far fewer rumors about his resigning and more and more talk 
about his and Russia's political firmness. What is the reason 
for this change in the foreign minister's image and in Russia's 
foreign policy course? Our long discussion took place on board 
a Tu-134, and, surprisingly, Kozyrev had left his usual 
diplomatic restraint back on the ground. [Passage omitted] 
  [Dolgopolov] We have now, touch wood, removed the threat of 
nuclear war. I have a different question. Today our Russian 
diplomatic service and you as its main repository have a new 
image -- a fairly aggressive one. I did not board this aircraft 
to praise you. But over the last few months things have been 
more successful for Russia in this field. Let us recall poor 
Yugoslavia at least. What is the reason for the turnaround? 
And how do those Americans who, I bet, are unaccustomed to 
seeing you as a determined man, react to these changes? Is 
there a grain of truth in my observations? 
  [Kozyrev] Certainly. Russia will never become a 
second-rate, insignificant country. We will put straight anyone 
who does not understand that right away. Russia must be a 
great, global power. But I must point out that diplomacy and 
indeed policy as a whole never arise out of nothing. They 
derive strength from society and are shaped by the state. But 
we have a new Russian state system, it has already found its 
level. And diplomacy is accordingly acquiring a different 
voice. This is very easy to talk about now, whereas back in 
1991 we had to speak loudly and energetically. People forget one 
thing: Our huge state had after all broken up then. And our 
newly formed country was faced initially not with the question 
of having a loud voice but of having a voice at all and 
remaining within the international system. No one said that the 
Russian Federation is the rightful heir of the Soviet Union's 
legacy. I admit to you that in those conditions the task of 
practicing the diplomacy of the least possible losses is a 
highly complex one. That is roughly what we did in 1991, when 
the Union ceased to exist, and in 1992. Never mind the 
luxuries, all we wanted to do was stay alive. 
  And we survived. What is more we joined all the 
international organizations to which the USSR was just not 
admitted. Everything comes to him who waits. That is why 
Russian diplomacy is growing stronger now. As a professional I 
am surprised by the fact that at this time a host of people has 
emerged who are yelling: But I was defending my doctor's thesis 
back then, in the second year at the institute. However, you 
must not forget that the Soviet Union was a very unique state. 
It bore a kind of mark of Cain. Although it is our homeland 
and we do of course take pride in a lot of its heritage, the 
country was not entirely normal. You see what our diplomacy has 
had to come through. Everything's time comes. I want Russian 
statehood to grow stronger. And we need a firm authority. The 
firmer authority in Russia.... 
  [Dolgopolov] ...Excuse me, do you mean firm internal 
authority? 
  [Kozyrev] Yes, precisely that, then we will use even firmer 
language on the international arena. 
  [Dolgopolov] Andrey Vladimirovich, about the Americans. Are 
they conscious of this? 
  [Kozyrev] Of course they are. You know there is a 
two-pronged reaction. Anyone has some desire, a natural 
temptation to establish relations that are as suitable for 
themselves as possible. They have seen that we are normal 
people and will not fuel the nuclear threat. And of course the 
Americans want us to remain normal politicians. But like a poor 
relation. You are a good guy, so follow us. You used to be bad 
and did everything in an inhuman way. I must say that there is 
a grain of truth in this, although not 100 percent. A definite 
stereotype has developed: Since you are being good, follow us. 
But we are now saying: Yes, we have become good. But you will 
have to follow us on these issues. That may be causing them 
some discomfort in the United States: how, why? 
  Russia cannot of course, however, give in to euphoria or 
hysterics. But nor should the Americans think that we as a 
great power will always follow the United States without fail. 
Nothing of the sort! There are issues on which, and I do not 
rule this out, we may follow their lead. But in areas where it 
is natural they will have to follow Russia's lead. And in some 
spheres we will act together. 
  [Dolgopolov] Whom do you personally find it easier to deal 
with -- Christopher or his predecessors? 
  [Kozyrev] Let's not get onto that. 
  [Dolgopolov] It strikes me that even the Americans have 
realized that Russia is not a poor relative, if only because of 
the diplomatic success in Yugoslavia. Will there be a new 
flourish following the coming visit to Moscow by two sworn 
hard-liners -- Comrade `Arafat of the PLO and Mr. Rabin of 
Israel? Can we hope that the Near East problem will be solved 
after all? 
  [Kozyrev] At any rate we do not plan to withdraw from the 
Near East. You see, we have taken part in this process from the 
very outset -- in conjunction with the Americans, naturally, as 
co-sponsors.... 
  [Dolgopolov] That's a difficult word. 
  [Kozyrev] Co-sponsors? We have been like Siamese twins. 
The States once proposed a new format to us -- we agreed to 
always speak with a single voice. If Russia said something, it 
meant that the United States would do the same (and vice versa, 
of course) -- that was roughly the understanding. Our American 
partners started approaching this issue, as it were, in a new 
way. They began coming up with their own initiatives. 
Admittedly, they were always aimed in the same direction. But 
when we asked them several times why these initiatives had not 
been coordinated with us in some considerable detail, they 
replied: "Why should we coordinate details on this!" 
  And let me tell you something frankly. After a couple of 
answers like that we told them: "OK, since that's your idea of 
partnership, maybe it suits us too." Then it was "so long, 
Siamese twins." We are still people pulling the cart in the 
same direction. We will just each be doing so in our own way. 
And we too have started speaking with our own voice and taking 
our own initiatives. We and the United States have common goals 
-- only a peace settlement will do, nothing else. But our steps 
will be completely independent. We are no longer twins but 
people doing the same job but by different means. Recently in 
Vladivostok I mentioned this bluntly to Christopher: If you 
want to have very close cooperation anywhere, let's discuss it. 
In other areas it might indeed not be advisable to speak with a 
single voice. We can each do it in our own way -- and, 
naturally, head in the same direction. But it should not be the 
case that the United States has, as it were, free partnership, 
while Russia has close partnership. If you have the freedom to 
come up with your own initiatives on a specific issue, then we 
have exactly the same freedom. Let there be equal opportunities 
and commitments. If we agree once again to operate somewhere as 
Siamese twins and if it is in our common interests, then that is 
possible too. 
  [Dolgopolov] I really get the feeling that in certain parts 
of the world our interests are interlinked. Take North Korea -- 
which the Americans claim already has an atom bomb. But isn't 
the United States being too tough on the Koreans? There's no 
visible sign of even normal diplomacy. The sons of Kim Il-song 
have their backs to the wall, and no escape is obvious. 
  [Excerpts] [Kozyrev] That is why we came up with a new 
initiative the other day. It has two simple, clear elements 
which reflect the interests both of us and, I am sure, of all 
other normal states. The first is to prevent the 
nonproliferation regime from being undermined. 
  And the second. It has proved really impossible to solve the 
problem on a U.S.-DPRK basis alone -- there has just been 
further deterioration and tension. I won't say who is right and 
who is wrong. But the fact is that this is the situation. So 
we have proposed convening an international conference to 
discuss and resolve this problem. The participants would be the 
states in direct proximity and with real interests. These would 
be Russia -- the events are almost as if they are happening in 
the near abroad, right in our back yard. China. The United 
States -- for the simple reason that the Koreans are demanding 
certain decisions from the States. And the two Koreas and Japan. 
  [Dolgopolov] Andrey Vladimirovich, we ourselves also have 
plenty of difficult problems in the far, or -- as you might 
interpret it -- near abroad. Just take the protracted dispute 
with Japan over the northern territories. First there are 
reports that our border guards have been quietly withdrawn. 
Then the president's press secretary explains that it is not 
the border guards who are being withdrawn, just obsolete 
equipment. Hata recently visited Moscow. So just what is going 
on? 
  [Kozyrev] A clear-cut formula was reached during Yeltsin's 
visit to Tokyo -- the northern territories issue does exist. 
Unfortunately, we have inherited an unregulated border from the 
USSR. The treaty which would fix the border does not exist. It 
is in both our interest and that of the Japanese to work on this 
issue. But although this was a stumbling block to the 
development of any kind of relations for 45 years following the 
war, this is now no longer the case -- as the Hata visit 
confirmed. Admittedly, nothing revolutionary has happened -- 
and may not happen for a long time to come. It is a highly 
complex matter. But there is no cause for despair, we must keep 
on trying. This does not mean that they should make 
concessions, or that we are obliged to either. We have to work 
on this for as long as it takes. 
  [Dolgopolov] Now a word about another visit which strangely 
became a talking point. 
  [Kozyrev] You're talking about Nixon's visit? 
  [Dolgopolov] I know that you did not meet with him, but what 
happened? How do you view Yeltsin's appearance against the 
backdrop of the Kremlin wall, where he treated the old 
ex-president extremely severely? Nixon, who is 81 years old, 
has definite influence with Republicans in the United States, 
and it was not just anyone but Democrat Bill Clinton who sent 
him to our country. 
  [Kozyrev] I will tell you everything I know about this. I 
am aware of the external aspects and some of the internal 
aspects. It is like the theater: The Americans simply have 
poor producers. The whole scene may have been badly planned. A 
good, well-known actor appears -- Nixon. But the producer makes 
a major error: The actor appears at quite the wrong moment. He 
turns up in the wrong play, using his lines in a different 
dialogue at the wrong moment. The audience laughs. And someone 
gets angry. The irritation begins. This is what happened to 
Nixon. This was the first time in all his recent visits that he 
did not address me, for instance. 
  [Dolgopolov] Are you friendly with him? 
  [Kozyrev] Very. It must be said that he was undertaking an 
interesting mission. He has found his niche. He came here with 
a similar objective under Gorbachev in 1991. And even then he 
tracked me down at the Russian Foreign Ministry -- in a wretched 
small building with a collapsing floor. We organized everything 
normally for him. "Gorbymania" was at its height in the United 
States. And on his return he decided to say that "Gorbymania" 
only ruled in the West, while the situation was effectively the 
reverse in the USSR. And he also told the United States about 
Yeltsin the real political figure. So neither I nor Boris 
Nikolayevich have anything but respect for Nixon. He is a major 
political figure. And visits by people of that level must be 
organized by professionals. A foreign minister should not have 
to learn about a former president's visit in the newspapers. 
  [Dolgopolov] So who did organize it? 
  [Kozyrev] I do not want to say who did this. The people who 
did it know who they are. But it was not that they were 
unprofessional in what they did, but deliberately overturned 
everything. Absolutely! Everything was topsy-turvy so that the 
main hero became the main villain. He did not meet Boris 
Nikolayevich. But the president learned that Nixon had gone to 
see Rutskoy, Zhirinovskiy, everyone. I cannot understand it, no 
one has ever behaved like that. Impromptu moves are well 
prepared for any visit by a politician who is in any way 
respectable. I hope everyone is aware of this. But impromptu 
moves for the sake of it are a mistake. Nixon's visit involved 
a series of political mistakes. I don't think he himself had 
anything to do with it. I think he was told that the program 
had been worked out and prepared as always. He does not have to 
go into every detail. There is a certain apparatus to handle 
this. But Nixon found himself in a very surprising situation. 
Imagine: You get up early one morning, go to your bathroom in 
your robe, clean your teeth, and suddenly there is someone else 
there, albeit a friend, but someone whom you did not invite. 
And you say in amazement: "Why couldn't you call me and tell 
me you were coming? Aren't we good friends?" And Boris 
Nikolayevich was right to say that he had not been treated as 
befits the president of Russia. 
  [Dolgopolov] You mentioned that Nixon met with 
Zhirinovskiy. And Vladimir Volfovich tried to a certain extent 
to pass himself off as your colleague -- he was dying to head 
the Duma International Affairs Committee. 
  [Kozyrev] He's dying to be head of state. 
  [Dolgopolov] Would you shake his hand? 
  [Kozyrev] No. 
  [Dolgopolov] Or acknowledge him? 
  [Kozyrev] I have no truck with fascists. 
  [Dolgopolov] What then is your attitude to the Duma's rather 
surprising amnesty law? 
  [Kozyrev] To my mind, the decision to release everybody was 
by no means right. 
  [Dolgopolov] But a memorandum of accord has already been 
prepared.... 
  [Kozyrev] ...The talk of a universal accord is abstract. If 
the concept has something else in mind other than the 
Constitution -- an agreement with the fascists, for instance -- 
I do not understand it and will have no part of it. If it means 
agreement with the party of war that Rutskoy leads, I will tell 
you bluntly -- Rutskoy means war. 
  [Dolgopolov] ...Aren't you being a bit hard on the former 
vice president? 
  [Kozyrev] ...There is civil, cold, and maybe even hot war in 
the world. Let me tell you straightaway -- if Rutskoy or 
Zhirinovskiy becomes president, Russia will not survive. I 
would repeat that I am giving you my personal view. I can see 
no agreement on this. What would it consist of? Of observing 
the Constitution? The entire people voted for that. But those 
who called on Russia to take up the sword should be kept in 
jail. Until such time as Zhirinovskiy abandons his blatantly 
fascist slogans and Rutskoy his gamble on, essentially, a rerun 
of the Yugoslavia situation in Russia, I can have no agreement 
with them. 
  [Dolgopolov] One more difficult question before we land, 
Andrey Vladimirovich. 
  [Kozyrev] Go ahead. Although it's time to fasten your seat 
belt. 
  [Dolgopolov] It's about a problem which for some reason is 
of concern to almost everyone. Just what is the Foreign 
Ministry's personnel policy? For instance, who appoints 
ambassadors -- you or the Kremlin? Sometimes when you see 
people emerge in diplomatic posts you have to wonder: Just what 
is so-and-so -- not a career diplomat but a recycled political 
figure -- going to be doing abroad? 
  [Kozyrev] There has not been a single appointment that has 
not been coordinated with me. Sometimes the initiative may come 
from Boris Nikolayevich. Or somebody else might say -- 
so-and-so's a good man, he'd do well in such-and-such a posting. 
Yes, there are times when people are suggested. There are 
times when it is suggested to them. Sometimes they ask 
themselves. Admittedly they'll later say in public that they 
weren't asked, that they were virtually forced into it. I know 
pretty much exactly who asked and who didn't. 
  [Dolgopolov] But people do ask.... 
  [Kozyrev] Yes, there are non-career diplomats who ask for 
postings themselves. 
  [Dolgopolov] I should explain to readers that the word 
"non-career" means people who previously had no connection with 
the Foreign Ministry or diplomacy, but who have nonetheless 
received important postings far from home. 
  [Kozyrev] That's about the size of it. Now to turn to Boris 
Nikolayevich's role. He is the president, and under the 
Constitution he appoints the ambassadors. It is the Foreign 
Ministry Collegium which decides whom to recommend. But I would 
reiterate that there has not been a single ambassador posted by 
Boris Nikolayevich without our consent. We will now be 
consulting with parliament -- with four committees from the two 
chambers. 
  [Dolgopolov] My last question. There has now been a certain 
renewal among the top Foreign Ministry leadership. You have new 
deputies and even first deputies. Are you not worried that some 
of them -- former ambassador to Spain Igor Ivanov, for instance 
-- may be dealing with problems that are entirely new to them? 
He has been and still is a Europe specialist, but is now 
conducting highly difficult talks on the Near East. 
  [Kozyrev] Are you sure the job should definitely be done by 
an Arabist? We work on the basis of their experience, advice, 
and recommendations. But a first deputy minister, who makes 
policy and conducts talks, should have political experience and 
very high professional standards. I'm a supporter of teamwork. 
And I want people to know who works at the Foreign Ministry. 
There's Vitaliy Ivanovich Churkin -- he handles Yugoslavia. I 
am pleased for his -- our -- success. I have no inferiority 
complex at all. Boris Nikolayevich Pastukhov handles Georgia. 
Ivanov deals with the Near East.... These are all top-notch, 
experienced people. Each in their own post. 
  [Dolgopolov] We are landing, Andrey Vladimirovich. You 
yourself will realize that not everything we have discussed can 
be included in the interview. This isn't the West -- our 
newspapers are just eight pages long. So -- thank you, and we 
will try to include the most interesting parts of our talk. You 
yourself said that people should know about those who work at 
the Foreign Ministry. So now they will. 

</TEXT>

</DOC>
