ID: 7	RANK: 87	SCORE: 6.5360

<DOC>
<DOCNO> FBIS4-46668 </DOCNO>
<HT>    "jpusp005___94019" </HT>


<HEADER>
<AU>   JPRS-USP-94-005 </AU>
JPRS 
Science &amp; Technology 

</HEADER>

<ABS>  Central Eurasia: Space </ABS>
<DATE1>    8 April 1994 </DATE1>
<F P=100> SPACE POLICY, ADMINISTRATION </F>
<H3> <TI>   Conference on Entrepreneurial Opportunities in Space </TI></H3>
<HT><F P=107><PHRASE>    Conference on Entrepreneurial Opportunities in Space </PHRASE></F></HT>

<F P=102>   947Q0113A Moscow DELOVOY MIR in Russian 8 Apr 94 p 5 </F>
<F P=103> 947Q0113A </F>
<F P=104>  Moscow DELOVOY MIR </F>
<F P=105>  Russian </F>


<TEXT>
CSO 

<F P=106> [Article by Valentin Khalin: "Businessmen: Tear Into </F>
Space!"; the first paragraph is an introduction] 
  [Text] A scheduled International Scientific and Practical 
Conference "Businessmen and the Economic Exploitation of Space" 
will be held on 12 April, on Cosmonautics Day, in the 
Trade-Industrial Hall of the Russian Federation. The fifth in 
number, it, like the preceding four, was organized on the 
initiative of Viktor Shchekochikhin, owner of the Zemlyane 
Business Cooperation Association, president of the Russian Union 
of Private Property Owners. Valentin Khalin, a DELOVOY MIR 
reviewer, converses with V. Shchekochikhin: 
  "Viktor Vladimirovich," I addressed him, "allow me a leading 
question: is a measure directed to the stars appropriate under 
the conditions of the present-day economic decline?" 
  "It is more than appropriate! Incidentally with the 
implementation of space programs we are capable of dragging the 
sick Russian economy from the quagmire. A simple example. Once 
at the NPO Molniya they showed me several stunning innovations. 
These were, in particular, technological know-how projects for 
the processing of vegetables and fruits, meat and milk products. 
Such as Western soothsayers could not have dreamed of! Competent 
engineering execution and a minimum of investment and we will 
have excellent food products, losses in taking in the harvest, 
transport and storage of agricultural products will be reduced 
to zero. Is that not worth the candle for enterprising parties?" 
  "Another example. Space communication is five or six times 
cheaper than cable or radio relay communication. Taking the 
far-outlying provinces of our country into account, is it not 
advantageous for businessmen and for local administrators to 
invest capital in a promising, profitable business?" 
  "Experience has shown that the practical use of space 
research yields a significant saving and the invested funds are 
recouped in 5-7 years. For example, exploration for natural 
resources of the land and ocean from space is capable of 
ensuring a profit of about 7 rubles from 1 ruble of investment. 
You have to ask yourself, why have a prospector drill holes at 
random in the search for gold-bearing deposits if it is 
possible, by investing capital, to receive clues from space? Or 
consider the fishing enterprise. For weeks a ship explores the 
depths of the sea until a school of fish is found. Is it also 
not better to spend some money and receive reconnaissance 
information from space?" 
  "So that is why our association twice a year -- on the Day 
of 
the First Satellite and on the Day of the First Cosmonaut -- 
holds business meetings of scientists and entrepreneurs." 
  "You have convinced me, and I hope, the reader as well. But 
are the big money-bags taking the bait?" 
  "I can't say that the Zemlyane telephone is ringing off the 
hook. Nevertheless, from conference to conference, over the 
course of two and one-half years, there has been an undeviating 
increase in the ranks of enthusiasts for a breakthrough into 
space. Our future is there. In addition to the conversion of 
high technologies on the ground, in the future it is necessary 
to look for entry into airless space with entire factories -- 
metallurgical, biomedical, for the processing of radioactive and 
other wastes. Yes, and cosmogonic problems also enter the field 
of view of scientists in the process of exploitation of 
circumterrestrial space. Man has entered near space, but already 
there are projects for flights to other planets. They require 
the efforts of many countries. Those entrepreneurs who even 
today are making efforts to partake of the space `pie' are in an 
advantageous position in comparison with those who are standing 
by idly. For example, consider America. There a great many 
private companies, large and not very large, are successfully 
competing with the government space complex. The same situation 
prevails in most countries which have joined in space research. 
For example, last autumn, together with representatives of the 
Ministry of Science and Technical Policy of the Russian 
Federation, I visited Spain to study this experience. There the 
national space program is financed for the most part by private 
companies. And we Russians, are we any less?" 
  "In the conference program among its participants I see a 
whole constellation of distinguished scientists, cosmonauts and 
entrepreneurs: Gennadiy Alferenko, director of the 
Europe-America Space Transfer Project, Vladimir Bashmachnikov, 
president of the Farming Association, Yuriy Koptev, general 
director of the Russian Space Agency, along with Konstantin 
Borovoy, as well as Nikolay Rukavishnikov, president of the 
Russian Cosmonautics Federation, Stanislav Smirnov, president of 
the Russian Federation TPP, and Oleg Gartsev, board director of 
the Merchants and Industrialists Society. But will the 
authorities participate?" 
  "There also will be official representatives, in particular, 
with a report on the prospects for the commercialization of 
space research. The conference will take place during the day of 
12 April at the Trade- Industrial Hall and in the evening its 
participants are invited to a solemn session on the occasion of 
Cosmonautics Day. Russian society is coming to the 
understanding: the state space program along is unable to cover 
the infinitude of required investments. The organizing committee 
of the scientific-practical conference proposes that 
businessmen, insurance companies, commercial banks and 
representatives of regional administrations be ready to enter 
into contact with specialists working on commercial projects in 
the field of high technologies and materials, ecology, 
monitoring and study of natural resources, space communications 
and medicine..." 
  "It must be surmised that they will not come out of simple 
curiosity; they will be seeking for themselves sources of 
financing for commercial cosmonautics. And they will not be 
losers. Their investments will pay for themselves a hundredfold." 

</TEXT>

</DOC>
