ID: 4	RANK: 17	SCORE: 14.6206

<DOC>
<DOCNO> FBIS3-20504 </DOCNO>
<HT>    "jpcar017___94033" </HT>


<HEADER>
<AU>   JPRS-CAR-94-017 </AU>
Document Type:JPRS 
Document Title:China 

<DATE1>  16 December 1993 </DATE1>

</HEADER>

<F P=100> TAIWAN </F>
<H3> <TI>   Kuomintang General Criticizes President Li </TI></H3>
<F P=102>  94CM0130A Hong Kong PAI HSING [THE PEOPLE] in Chinese No 33, 
16 Dec 93 pp 52-55 </F>

<F P=103> 94CM0130A </F>
<F P=104>  Hong Kong PAI HSING [THE PEOPLE] </F>


<TEXT>
Language: <F P=105> Chinese </F>
Article Type:CSO 

<F P=106> [Article by Lu K'eng (7120 6972) "Hsu Li-nung (6079 2980 </F>
6593) Opposed To Direct Election of President"] 
  [Excerpts] [Passage omitted] 
  This magazine's correspondent availed himself of the 
opportunity that a visit to Taiwan afforded to observe the 
election contest there. Following arrangements made by an old 
friend, Ting Chung-chiang [0002 0022 3068], he had a private 
interview with General Hsu Li-nung on 27 November in which 
Taiwan events were fully explored, including some 
behind-the-scenes political activities. 
  Question: Your announcement that you were leaving the 
Kuomintang to enter the New Party caused a stir both in Taiwan 
and abroad. I would like for you to talk about the thought 
process you used to make this decision. 
  This year marks my fifty-fourth year in the Kuomintang. 
[passage omitted]. I was a follower of the director general 
(meaning Chiang Kai-shek) and of Chairman Chiang (meaning Chiang 
Ching-kuo). I took part in the War of Resistance to Japan, 
resistance to Russia, and these campaigns in Taiwan. In all the 
Kuomintang's travails, I gave my all without rancor or regret. 
With such profound feelings, for me to leave all of a sudden was 
naturally a very painful decision. 
  Why did I want to leave the Kuomintang? Because I could not 
subscribe to citizen direct elections or anonymous entry into 
the United Nations. The recent proposal for two Chinas, in 
particular, was going too far. It ran counter to the precepts 
that the Kuomintang party president [Dr. Sun Yat-sen], the party 
director general [Chiang Kai-shek], and the party chairman, Mr. 
Chiang Ching-kuo always upheld. 
  Talking about deterioration, he (meaning President Li 
Teng-hui) has virtually become a follower of the Democratic 
Progressive Party. He implements the Democratic Progressive 
Party's policies. All of his important decisions echo the 
Democratic Progressive Party. Take citizen direct elections. I 
am not opposed to them, but I am opposed to direct citizen 
elections at the present stage. If the president is elected by 
20 million Taiwanese, is he the president of Taiwan or the 
president of the Republic of China? Furthermore, if the 
president is elected by an opposition party that does not 
identify with the country, is he president of the Republic or 
China, or president of the Republic of China in Taiwan? If the 
president is elected by the Democratic Progressive Party, he 
becomes the president of the Republic of Taiwan. 
  I had a talk with Mr. Li Teng-hui. Also present at the time 
was former Examination Yuan president, Huang Tsun-ch'iu, and two 
others. He said that "the reason some people are opposed to 
direct citizen elections is they fear that a candidate from a 
province other than Taiwan will never be elected president." The 
other three said nothing, so I said, "So far as I know, no one 
from any other province is thinking of becoming president at the 
present time, and no person from another province can become 
president. What worries me is that if you lose out to the 
Democratic Progressive Party in an election, that will be the 
end of the Republic of China." 
  He looked very displeased. Of course, many things I have 
done 
offended him, and this was one of them. 
  Why did he (meaning Li Teng-hui) speak so bluntly? My guess 
is that he could not be idiotic enough to really believe what he 
said. Since there were three other Taiwanese present at the 
time, I assume he purposely stirred up provincial feelings to 
pursue and consolidate his own political interests. 
  Citizen direct elections is the Democratic Progressive 
Party's policy. I can speak with knowledge about this matter. Li 
Yuan-ts'u, Chiang Yen-shih, and Sung Ch'u-yu did not know about 
it at the time. It was announced on Friday; as of Wednesday, no 
one knew about it. Early that day, a meeting was called to study 
this problem. At the time I was a member of the Standing 
Committee. I went to the meeting a little early. Li, Chiang, and 
several others were already there. In the car I heard on the 
radio that more and more high ranking people in the Central 
Committee were for direct citizen elections. After arriving at 
the meeting, I passed on to everyone what I had heard on the 
radio. I asked, "What is the meaning of this? Chiang Yen-shih 
said, "I heard it too," but Li Yuan-ts'u expressed great 
surprise. This showed that this main player still did not know. 
  Question: What did you think about this? 
  Answer: I felt it was the Democratic Progressive Party's 
idea. Mr. Lu, do you know that Chang Jung-fa has a fund? A 
national policy study center is under this fund. [passage 
omitted] The National Policy Center is run by Mr. T'ien Hung-mao 
[3944 1738 5399]. The National Policy Center puts out a 
bi-weekly magazine, which is the voice of Taiwan independence. 
  People say that at first this idea (meaning direct citizen 
elections) was proposed by four people: Kao Ying-mao, T'ien 
Hung-mao, Ch'eng Chung-mo, and Huang Shih-ch'eng. Later on, 
someone gave me proof. I won't mention this person's name now. 
He said that he had dined with T'ien Hung-mao and Ch'eng 
Chung-mo, and that they said that committee member direct 
elections would be soon changed. 
  Question: What other examples show that Mr. Li Teng-hui is 
carrying out the policy of the Democratic Progressive Party? 
  Answer: Hsu Hsin-liang's remarks serve as an example too. 
Once a media correspondent told Hsu Hsin-liang that the 
Democratic Progressive Party is in cahoots with Li Teng-hui. Hsu 
Hsin-liang said, "It is not the Democratic Progressive Party 
that is in cahoots with Li Teng-hui, but Li Teng-hui who is in 
cahoots with the Democratic Progressive Party." The Democratic 
Progressive Party wants direct citizen elections, so Li Teng-hui 
calls for direct citizen elections. The Democratic Progressive 
Party wants Hao Po-ts'un to step down, so Li Teng-hui calls for 
Hao Po-ts'un to step down. The Democratic Progressive Party 
wants to get into the United Nations, so Li Teng-hui tries to 
get into the United Nations. When it was in Hao's cabinet, the 
Democratic Progressive Party wanted to enter the United Nations 
anonymously, but Hao Po-ts'un flatly refused. 
  Question: Let us go back now to talk about what you are so 
opposed to "two China's," all right? 
  Answer: All right! I'll talk first about how things will 
end. 
He is now proposing "two China's." Next, he will talk about "one 
China and one Taiwan," and then it will be the "Republic of 
Taiwan." What am I so strongly opposed to this? I remember 
something that happened a year ago. When Kuomintang legislator 
Ch'en Che-nan ran for election, he used "one China, one Taiwan" 
as a political appeal. At that time, neither government agencies 
nor the party headquarters said anything, but in the Central 
Committee Standing Committee, we asked how a Kuomintang member 
running for election could use "one China, one Taiwan" as an 
appeal? President Li's answer was: Let us first define the 
meaning of "one China." As a Chinese on the soil of the Republic 
of China and in the Kuomintang headquarters, he still had doubts 
about "one China." I connected these two things together. It 
made me realize that this had been going on for a long time; it 
positively was not sudden. 
  Chiang Ping-k'un says he proposed a "two Chinas" on the 
basis 
of Ministry of Foreign Affairs materials, but Ch'ien Fu says he 
never saw them. Let me ask, just where did this "two China's" 
come from? 
  I personally feel that as a Chinese Kuomintang member, I 
should adhere to the precepts of the party president, the party 
director general, and Chairman Chiang. If everything you do 
today runs contrary to the abiding precepts, and I continue to 
remain inside echoing what others say and going along with the 
crowd, I am a traitor to the party and not upholding integrity 
in my later years. 
  Today, some people say I am a traitor to the party. They say 
that I do not uphold integrity in my later years. Chang 
Hsiao-yen even criticized me saying "a loyal minister does not 
serve two sovereigns, and a chaste woman does not serve two 
husbands." I believe that the "sovereign" we are talking about 
today is not an emperor but a concept. If I have one point of 
view today for one master, and I adopt another point of view 
tomorrow if the master changes, only then does the issue of 
"serving two sovereigns" exist. It is because I want to maintain 
integrity in my late years that I have now left the Kuomintang. 
Chang Hsiao-yen's mentioning of loyal ministers and chaste women 
is very ridiculous. 
  Question: Please discuss what will be the consequences if 
the 
Taipei authorities abandon "one China." One important reason why 
the Chinese Communists had a positive view of old Mr. Chiang 
was, as they said, "Mr. Chiang stood by one China. He displayed 
ethnic righteousness." 
  Answer: In my view, abandonment of "one China" is to take 
the 
Taiwan independence road. Internally, people like me cannot sit 
by and watch the demise of the Republic of China, and I am 
certainly not the only one who has this attitude. Some people 
cannot say so since they have not yet retired. When I was on the 
Standing Committee and was one of the heads of a department or 
committee, I held this attitude. I said, I am holding my badge 
of office in my hand ready to put it aside at any time. Some 
people cannot avoid having this or that apprehension, but when 
they come to life or death, survival or demise of the Republic 
of China, they can still step forward bravely. 
  Secondly, the Chinese Communists cannot sit by and look on 
at 
Taiwan independence. They have declared many times that if 
Taiwan becomes independent, they will go to war. In the Central 
Standing Committee, I analyzed this matter with Li Teng-hui. I 
asked if Taiwan becomes independent, what alternatives might the 
Chinese Communists take. First is going to war and what the 
consequences might be. Second is not going to war, but 
instituting a blockade and what might ensue. Third is announcing 
a blockade, for example, announce a blockade in November to go 
into effect on 1 March of the following year and see what 
happens. When this happens, very likely foreign capital will 
flee, and people having money will flee. At the time, Li 
Teng-hui said that you are using the Chinese Communists to scare 
the Taiwan public. The newspaper has printed his remarks. But I 
absolutely was not scaring anybody. 
  I told them solemnly that Taiwan independence should cause a 
serious catastrophe for Taiwan at once. 
  They said that every year we draw up such a large national 
defense budget. We have three powerful military services. Why 
should we fear the Communists? I said I admit that our three 
services are strong, but if the Chinese armed forces invade can 
we wipe them all out? What will happen to Taiwan? In warfare 
nowadays -- like in Kuwait, for example -- when the American 
army went into Kuwait, it lost seven men. This kind of warfare 
is called "advance warfare," but it employs airplanes, missiles, 
and all kinds of heavy weapons to disintegrate the enemy, 
including the enemy's government, economy, and especially his 
armed forces. When that happens, how many families will be 
broken up and scattered, how many fathers and mothers will lose 
their sons and daughters, and how many sons and daughters will 
lose their fathers and mothers. Or how many widows and orphans 
will be made? In other matters I may be a greenhorn, but I have 
been a military many for many years. At least I am no greenhorn 
about that. 
  Question: In view of present relations between both sides of 
the Strait, if you were in charge, what do you think would be 
the best course? 
  Answer: Given the present circumstances, the best course is 
to adopt a positive attitude about promoting mainland reform, 
realizing free, democratic, and equally wealthy unification at 
the proper time. In advance of the Fourteenth Plenary Session, 
the Kuomintang Central Committee invited a number of scholars, 
and experts to discuss a political program draft with some 
members of the Central Committee. I presented two ideas at this 
meeting: One was to remove restrictions on non-political direct 
shipping. Today, large amounts of exports from Taiwan reach the 
mainland, but they are transshipped through a third location. 
This increases the waste of manpower, material, and financial 
resources. Second is to remove restrictions on mainland labor 
coming to Taiwan. Restrictions have been removed on foreign 
laborers, why not for our fellow countrymen? Mainland workers 
have the same language, customs and habits, so why persist in 
getting people who have a different language, customs, and 
habits, rejecting what is close at hand while going after what 
is far away? 
  [passage omitted] 

</TEXT>

</DOC>
