ID: 4	RANK: 8	SCORE: 15.9781

<DOC>
<DOCNO> FBIS4-66228 </DOCNO>
<HT>    "jpcar031___94017" </HT>


<HEADER>
<AU>   JPRS-CAR-94-031 </AU>
JPRS 
China 

<DATE1>  28 February 1994 </DATE1>

</HEADER>

<F P=100> TAIWAN </F>
<H3> <TI>   Li Teng-hui: Beneficiary of 28 February Incident? </TI></H3>
<HT><F P=107><PHRASE>    Li Teng-hui: Beneficiary of 28 February Incident? </PHRASE></F></HT>

<F P=102>   94CM0235A Taipei TZULI WANPAO in Chinese 28 Feb 94 p 3 </F>
<F P=103> 94CM0235A </F>
<F P=104>  Taipei TZULI WANPAO </F>
<F P=105>  Chinese </F>


<TEXT>
CSO 

<F P=106> [Article by Ch'en I-shen (7115 0308 3234), assistant </F>
researcher, Modern History Department, China Research Institute: 
"Victim, Injured Party, or Beneficiary?--Notes on What This 
Year's 28 February Incident Anniversary Will Do to Li Teng-hui"] 
  [Text] Following the opening up of politics and society, 
there have often been different themes in the anniversaries of 
the 28 February Incident in the past several years. One time it 
was marked by the Legislative Yuan's standing in silent tribute 
for the first time, at another time it was the observance by the 
Executive Yuan's study group, and at still another time it was 
the observance at a grand meeting of the State Music 
Department--what will it be this year? From the TZULI WANPAO 
supplement one sees on the two palms of the old man Lin Mu-ch'i 
[2651 2606 2630] of Keelung the scars clearly left by wires, as 
well as the process in which 81 persons were formed in nine 
lines and shot dead. Certainly many people are shocked into 
jumping up and saying "Sure enough, it's true...." Should this 
manifesation of oral history leave the most clear and lively 
impression at this year's anniversary of the 28 February 
Incident? 
  Unexpectedly, President Li Teng-hui, when receiving on 24 
February the family survivors of those killed in the 28 February 
Incident, said that he was a victim (injured party?) of the 
incident, a statement that for several days running has been the 
focus of the news media. 
<H5>  The 28 February Incident and White Terror Should Not Be </H5>
Jumbled Together 
  From the available material one cannot see a record of Li 
Teng-hui's taking part in the 28 February Incident or of him 
being made a victim of it. Someone then searched for an 
explanation in the direction of "the victims' family members," 
but after reviewing his family tree and geneology could find no 
evidence and could only describe him as a fairly abstract 
"injured party." This will never satisfy the reader's curiosity. 
Li Teng-hui said clearly that he himself....[as published] 
Therefore, the heroic deeds of the fifties and sixties have 
been completely revealed, and so has: Who joined the Communist 
Party, who was familiar with Huang Wen-hsiung [7806 2429 7160], 
who was the protaganist in the Chiang [5592] assassination case, 
and even the experience in White Terror on the part of other 
government officials who left the ranks to serve as a prop. 
  In my opinion, the 28 February Incident has its particular 
reason, course, and result, and it should not be lumped together 
with the White Terror of the fifties. Beginning on the evening 
of 27 February 1947 with the occurrence of the anticontraband 
tobacco incident, and going through the initial insurrection 
stage, negotiation and disposition stage, suppression and 
massacre stage, up to 16 May when Wei Tao-ming [7614 6670 2494] 
became the provincial governor, abolished martial law, and ended 
the activities to eliminate the bandits in the 
countryside...this was the 28 February Incident. The White 
Terror of the fifties was, after the Kuomintang (KMT) "central" 
government moved to Taiwan, mainly focused on activities to 
eliminate Leftists and Reds. If the two are not clearly 
distinguished, how can we calculate the number of dead persons? 
How can we talk about cause and effect? How can we remember the 
lessons of history? 
<H5>  Political Effect of 28 February Incident </H5>
In the initial period after the 28 February Incident, the 
residents of Taipei City staged a demonstration in which they 
carried the corpses of those who had been machine-gunned to 
death and shouted: "A Shan-tzu [7093 1472 0098]" killed these 
people. At the side of a fountain in Chiayi City, residents 
chased and beat people wearing Sun Yat-sen suits, and there was 
a clear image of clan conflict. However, if there were no enmity 
provoked by political rule, how could the cultural differences 
or clan contradictions of that time have become such a 
widespread and swift upheaval? The KMT's way of handling the 
incident was not just to suppress the rebellion, but to carry 
out a retaliatory massacre, which caused the death, or the 
leaving or withdrawal from the political world of a large number 
of Taiwan's elites. One can well imagine the quality of the 
Taiwanese political figures who filled the vacancies at that 
time. Over the past decades local factions "have had license to 
run wild," letting the KMT divide and rule, a situation that has 
a close connection to the 28 February Incident. Therefore, the 
political effect of the 28 February Incident is very clear. It 
settled the KMT's stable rule on Taiwan for several decades, 
causing Taiwan "to have no" clan or crowd problem for several 
decades. However, the KMT, under the martial law system, to 
gloss over its nature as an external regime, had no choice but 
to cultivate and use the Taiwanese "elites" whom it trusted. 
Didn't Li Teng-hui have his meteoric rise under the 
circumstances of this general trend of events? If it is said 
that the KMT regime was a beneficiary of the 28 February 
Incident, how can it be said that Li Teng-hui was also not one 
of the beneficiaries? 
<H5>  The Focus Was on How To Avoid "National Disorder" </H5>
  At the time of the 28 February Incident, although there no 
loud cries for Taiwan's independence, in Taipei the word "China" 
on the signboards of the China Tourist Association and the China 
Bank was pulled down, and many things connected with "China" 
were burned in the streets. It is not hard for us to feel that 
Japan, in its 50 years of colonial but modernized rule, 
cultivated the people of this island--the Taiwan people's 
consciousness of this should ferment. Although because time is 
not short and because of the restrictions of objective 
conditions, the elites who took part in the 28 February Incident 
probably have not reached a common understanding about founding 
a new country, the entire 28 February Incident really can be 
viewed as a "national disorder" that caused "injury to members 
of the same clan." 
  Why did Taiwan want to be ruled by Japan? Why did it also 
want to be ruled by China? Without founding a new, independent 
country, how can a repeat of the 28 February Incident be 
avoided? Any introspection about, commemoration of, or 
disposition of the 28 February Incident, I'm afraid, must be 
examined with this criteria in mind. 
  When the "28 February Incident delegation that traveled to 
America and returned home" requested that Li Teng-hui "publicly 
apologize," Li Teng-hui did not make a clear reply, but rather 
tried to mislead them with the emotional statement "I am also an 
injured party." Actually, the entire government's handling of 
the 28 February Incident may be said to one of muddling along 
for the past year, that is, the measure for compensation is 
stranded in the Legislative Yuan, P'eng Meng-ch'i [1756 1322 
4874] still occupies an official building of more than 1,000 
p'ing [one p'ing is an area six feet square], and the 
modern history of Taiwan, which the provincial historical 
documents society has time and again bragged about, was written 
with this idea of ourselves against the enemy .... What is 
strange is that recently the editorials in newspapers have 
maintained that it would be inadvisable for Li Teng-hui, in his 
status as a Taiwanese president, to publicly apologize for the 
28 February Incident! 
  With regard to dealing with the aftermath of the 28 February 
Incident, President Li Teng-hui--as a beneficiary of the KMT 
system--has very many things that he should do but has not yet 
done, and a public apology is only one of them. The Taiwanese 
people should know that language group affinity is not a 
necessary factor for founding a country. If people often, 
because of Li Teng-hui's status as a Taiwanese president, lose 
their ability to think and are perfectly happy to let him 
"deceive them by playing on their feelings," this precisely 
shows that they have not yet drawn the proper lesson from the 28 
February Incident. 

</TEXT>

</DOC>
