ID: 20	RANK: 100	SCORE: 13.8576

<DOC>
<DOCNO> FBIS3-20884 </DOCNO>
<HT>    "jpest005___94001" </HT>


<HEADER>
<AU>   JPRS-EST-94-005 </AU>
Document Type:JPRS 
Document Title:Science &amp; Technology 

</HEADER>

<ABS>  Europe/International Economic Competitiveness </ABS>
<DATE1>   3 March 1994 </DATE1>
<F P=100> WEST EUROPE </F>
<F P=101> SCIENCE &amp; TECHNOLOGY POLICY </F>
<H3> <TI>   EU Fourth Framework Aims, Funding Viewed </TI></H3>
<F P=102>  BR1602100594 Paris BIOFUTUR in French Jan 94 p32 </F>
<F P=103> BR1602100594 </F>
<F P=104>  Paris BIOFUTUR </F>


<TEXT>
Language: <F P=105> French </F>
Article Type:BFN 

<F P=106> [Article signed Olivier Revelant: "Fourth Framework </F>
Program: A Difficult Birth"] 
  [Text] European research has just had a close shave. 
Against the backdrop of the Treaty of Maastricht, the 
persistent disagreement between the European Parliament and the 
Council of Ministers almost sabotaged the implementation of the 
fourth framework program for research and development. It came 
within an inch of seeing its coffers empty at the start of 1995. 
  The formal proposal and the content of the specific programs 
of the fourth framework program for technological research and 
development were approved by the European Commission 6 October 
1993. The total sum proposed for life sciences amounted to 1.265 
billion ECU [European Currency Units]. This represents 10 
percent of the total framework program budget -- 13.1 billion 
ECU -- to which we should add the 600 million ECU earmarked for 
the Community's joint research center whose status is currently 
under discussion. The joint research center consists of four 
structures located in Ispra [Italy], Petten [Netherlands, 
Institute of Advanced Materials], Geel [Belgium, Institute of 
Measurement and Reference Materials], and Karlsruhe [Germany, 
Transuranian Institute]. It is directed by Jean-Pierre Contzen. 
We must bear in mind that the budget for the third framework 
program was only 6.6 billion ECU. However, the budget has not 
risen significantly: The two framework programs differ in that 
now no Community research can be carried out outside of the 
framework program. In this context, the budget for the fourth 
framework program has risen by no more than five percent. 
<H5>  General Content of the Program </H5>
  According to the most recent estimates, the life sciences 
budget will be split up as follows: 46 to 50 percent to the 
biotechnologies sector; 15 to 19 percent to biomedicine and 
health; 33 to 37 percent to the application of living sciences 
to agriculture and fishing (this sector also includes 
agro-industries, forestry, rural development, and food 
technologies), and 4 to 8 percent on cross-disciplinary 
demonstration activities. The aim of these activities is to 
establish the technical feasibility of new approaches: They 
must simplify the transfer of technology to the users. Lastly, 
one to three percent of the budget will go to finance legal, 
ethical, and social aspects in order to improve dialogue between 
the main national and sociopolitical viewpoints. The subjects 
examined will include the problems raised by biodiversity, organ 
transplants, the confidentiality of genetic information, genetic 
therapy, and genetic fingerprinting. This activity concerns the 
three domains of biotechnology, biomedicine and health, and 
agro-industrial research. 
  For biotechnologies, the priorities will range from the 
"cell 
factory" (combining biological approaches and engineering 
dedicated to solving industrial problems), to the molecular 
biology of plants, cellular communication in neuroscience 
(cooperation with the international Human Frontiers program 
should in particular be strengthened), and genome analysis. It 
should be noted that the Commission's proposal once again refers 
to the analysis of genomes, and not merely to the human genome, 
contrary to the heading of the first version. AIDS, infectious 
illnesses (tuberculosis), cancer, and pharmaceutical and 
chemical research (in particular in vitro toxicity tests and the 
development of new animal models) will receive Community funding 
in the biomedicine and health sector. Finally, where the 
application of living science and technology to agriculture and 
fishing is concerned, the Community will focus its efforts on 
creating projects that affect all aspects of the transformation 
process for the main crops and products (from agriculture to the 
finished product, food and otherwise). 
<H5>  A Complex Decisionmaking Process </H5>
  The delays noted in setting up this fourth framework program 
are mainly due to the coming into force of the Maastricht Treaty 
which ushered in European Union on 1 November 1993. To provide 
for this delay, the third framework program budget was extended 
in June 1993 by 900 million ECU. The Treaty on European Union 
considerably alters the Community decisionmaking processes: The 
European Council, after consulting the parliament, votes by a 
qualified majority on specific programs. Thus, 23 programs 
figured in the Council's last version, while the Commission was 
proposing 18. The establishment of programs, whether under the 
Single European Act or the Treaty of the Union, is a two-stage 
procedure: one stage for the program and another stage for 
specific programs. However, while for the third framework 
program the specific programs were approved by the qualified 
majority vote of the Council after consulting the parliament, 
the fourth framework program must be approved unanimously by 
both the Council and the European Parliament (the coordination 
procedure). In the event of disagreement, and unlike the 
procedure under the Single Act, the program may be read a third 
time before parliament with the prior constitution of a 
conciliation committee. 
<H5>  Delayed Approval </H5>
  In this new decisionmaking framework, most Member States 
supported the Commission's proposal at a meeting held in 
Luxembourg on 11 October 1993. However, the main capital 
providers -- France, Germany, and the United Kingdom -- found 
the total sum a bit steep and would be happy with a total budget 
of just 10 billion ECU. The Council in particular considered 
the increase in the grants to the IT and communications 
technologies sector and to the energy sector to be too high 
(from four to seven percent and from one to four percent 
respectively). It is clear that this three-way opposition was 
vital to keeping to the schedule for program implementation, all 
the more so since certain countries, after having given their 
support on 11 October, were on the point of backing down. On 18 
November, at the second reading, the parliament decided to test 
out the new powers granted to it in the Treaty on European Union 
and voted for a budget higher than the one proposed by the 
Commission (13.7 billion ECU with an unchanged global budget for 
life sciences) after having made some 140 amendments, most of 
which originated with the Energy and Technological Research 
Commission [CERT]. For the parliament, the extra monies were 
justified by the fact that certain programs (Thermie, for 
example) now fall under the auspices of the program, and by the 
need to finance the socio-economic measures (100 million ECU). 
  The finale came on 6 December, when the Council submitted a 
new proposition to the parliament. An agreement was reached on 
the distribution of the funds, but not on the total: the 
Council proposed a budget of 11.5 billion ECU. Biology was 
particularly well funded, with a budget representing 15 percent 
of the overall total. The framework program is split into four 
subprograms: technological R&amp;D and demonstration; cooperation 
with third countries and international organizations; the 
distribution and use of the results of Community research; and 
the training and mobility of researchers. The life sciences 
budget represents 13.1 percent of the first subprogram which 
itself represents 27.8 percent of the total, a higher figure 
than that proposed by the Commission. This boost to the life 
sciences budget received the strong backing of Portugal, Greece, 
Ireland, and Spain since it includes the agriculture and fishing 
sectors. We should note that the industrial technologies budget 
has also been raised (16.2 percent) while the budget for 
information technologies has been cut (28 percent). The 
parliament will not be able to examine this proposal until 
February 1994. The logical hypothesis is that it will again 
amend the text before ratifying it, which would constitute a 
rejection, since the text must be approved in the same terms by 
both structures. It is nonetheless possible that agreement will 
be reached on a budget of about 13 billion ECU -- which would 
suit the parliament -- one billion of which would be frozen -- 
which would suit the Council. This proposal has received the 
backing of all countries except for Germany (for technical 
reasons). The Treaty of the Union favors this type of solution 
since it imposes a review of financial perspectives in 1996. 
France also proposed that the Heads of State decide on the 
budget total at the European Council meeting of 10 and 11 
December, since all negotiations have to be completed before the 
end of the current legislative term in June 1994. Agreement was 
finally reached on a high total: 12 billion Ecu plus 1.12 
billion ECU in reserve. The Council of Ministers ratified this 
decision at its meeting on 22 December. It suggested that 5.9 
billion ECU be assigned in the first two years with 6.1 billion 
ECU for the following two years (while holding back the frozen 
one billion ECU). The joint research center would benefit from a 
budget of 875 million ECU. In the best possible hypothesis, the 
parliament would rule on the dossier in the last week of January 
and the whole thing could be approved according to Parliamentary 
procedure A, i.e. without a plenary session debate and with an 
almost automatic vote. This agreement, obtained in extremis, 
would make it possible to avoid the coffers of European research 
being empty on 1 January 1995 and Greece, which is to take over 
the EC presidency from Belgium on 1 January 1994, will not then 
inherit this thorny issue. 

</TEXT>

</DOC>
