ID: 62	RANK: 52	SCORE: 8.1873
<DOC>
<DOCNO>FT923-7259</DOCNO>
<PROFILE>_AN-CHTBJACRFT</PROFILE>
<DATE>920819
</DATE>
<HEADLINE>
FT  19 AUG 92 / Arts: Relativism on the beach - Television
</HEADLINE>
<BYLINE>
   By CHRISTOPHER DUNKLEY
</BYLINE>
<TEXT>
WE LIVE in an age of relativism. On Sunday, Channel 4 began a three-part
series called The Real Thing which has a script so arch it should be
straddling the Champs Elysees, and that makes it somewhat difficult to
understand. However, the main thrust of its argument seems to be that
science is a lot of nasty stuff dreamed up by a few clever-clogs to
interfere with the instinctive wisdom of the noble savage, and that we are
now, thank goodness, moving from the age of reason back into older habits of
superstition. This programme is quite happy to consider on an equal footing
the claims of the witch doctor and the modern surgeon. Relativism rules, OK?
Only 30 years ago, the need to explain why Keats was a better poet than Bob
Dylan would not have arisen because the question would not have arisen.
Today many members of the younger generation seem not only unsure about the
relative merits of Keats and Dylan (in many cases they would champion Dylan
as the greater poet because they have heard his lyrics whereas they have
never read any Keats), but reluctant to distinguish at all between good and
bad, to admit that scientific medicine is superior to voodoo, or that there
is good art and bad.
The greatest influence in creating this sad state of affairs is surely
television which assesses the significance of its programmes in terms not of
their quality but of their ratings. The modern craze for sociology has
reinforced the tendency. When soap opera is considered at all, it is
considered not in terms of the quality of its drama but as a ratings
contestant or as a jokey social phenomenon: isn't it funny, quite sensible
people get hooked on them; panel investigations suggest that although some
fans like to pretend that they 'really believe', deep down they know
perfectly well that it is all fiction, so that's all right isn't it.
Most insidious of all is the modern relativist's argument that in the end,
when you come right down to it, there is nothing much to choose between
Eldorado and Hedda Gabler: the neighbours come round, there is an argument,
people shout at one another, sex rears its ugly head, everything blows up
into a flaming row, and we all get an exciting climax. What does Henrik
Ibsen have that Julia Smith doesn't? Perhaps the time has come to try to
answer that question. Perhaps the few of us who have always insisted that
there is a considerable quantity of very good material on British
television, and that we should seek it out as we seek out good books and
good operas, should stop being jokily dismissive about soap opera and try to
say why it really is inferior stuff.
Television has not shown any version of Hedda Gabler in the recent past (why
not?), but on Saturday Channel 4 did screen Fellini's astounding 1960 movie
La Dolce Vita which will serve well enough to show the sort of thing that
truly powerful drama can do which soap opera does not even attempt. La Dolce
Vita is knowingly a part of a long artistic continuum which, down the
centuries, has offered Italians, and of course everybody else, vividly
illustrated commentary upon man's moral condition. It opens and closes with
references to Dante. It is scathing not only about the church but about
mankind's weakness for religious hocus pocus. It turns a series of
spotlights on post-war Roman society and exposes the appalling contrast
between material progress  - cars, shops, architecture  - and spiritual
regression.
La Dolce Vita is certainly not beyond criticism: it is nihilistic, too long,
and irritatingly episodic. All its characters are ciphers. It builds a huge
pedestal for the absurdly shaped Anita Ekberg, its central icon (which, of
course, Fellini is mocking) and then turns its back and never takes another
look. It is flawed in other respects too. Yet at the end you could not
possibly be in any doubt that you have been brought right up against the
thinking of one man, and even if you do not agree with his thoughts they
have been conveyed with tremendous vigour. La Dolce Vita does what virtually
all good contemporary drama does: opens your eyes to forces, trends, or
events which you had not noticed or, if you had noticed them and been
puzzled, helps to explain them.
Eldorado does no such thing because that is not its purpose. Its purpose is
to attract a large audience (somewhere between 15m and 20m, though at
present it is managing only about 5m). If it were appearing on a commercial
network, the intention would be the delivery of all those millions to
advertisers and hence, in the end, profits for the shareholders of the
television company.
People frequently ask 'Why does the BBC bother to make soaps at all, given
that it isn't trying to make profits for shareholders?' The answer is that
the BBC has always known it has to run a broad church if it is to stay among
the big boys of broadcasting, which means continuing to win political
agreement to the licence fee. That in turn means avoiding the fate of
American public service broadcasters whose output is limited to worthy
programmes meaning that they cannot command sizeable public funds.
In order to attract large audiences you do not have to make people think,
force them to acknowledge changing morals, or require them to look in a
mirror and identify their own shortcomings. Your work does not have to have
that universality of application and appeal across geographical boundaries
and across the centuries which truly great drama has from Sophocles to
Shakespeare.
You can win huge audiences with the most mundane trivia. In the last few
episodes of Eldorado we have seen the Webbs (and of course Drew Lockhead,
not to mention Dieter) drinking too much. We have found that Bunny is
jealous of the attention paid by young men to his child bride Fizz. Blair,
threatened with parental discipline, disappeared. Someone painted threats on
the walls of Marcus Tandy's flat. The Hindles' mum decided Spain was not for
her and went home.
None of it has any significance other than to serve as the next link in an
endless narrative; it is as desultory and formless as garden fence gossip.
Though it is chiefly concerned with expatriates, it has nothing even mildly
significant to say about the irony of such status in a supposedly united
Europe. Eldorado has a more pictorially interesting background than most
soap operas, but there is never the slightest attempt to produce the sort of
striking images with which La Dolce Vita is packed. Worse, by sheer bad
luck, presumably, Eldorado, which was so heavily promoted as featuring sun,
sea and sangria, seems to be shot on days that are consistently cold and
dull.
Where La Dolce Vita has an outstanding central performance from Marcello
Mastroianni and several other impressive appearances, the acting in Eldorado
is at about the standard we used to expect from Crossroads. That is not to
say that Eldorado will not eventually do what the BBC wants and pull in
great big ratings. It is to say that we ought to begin challenging the
inverted snobs  - relativists all  - who maintain that La Dolce Vita (like
GBH or tomorrow's repeat of Alan Bennett's wonderful Talking Heads) is not
'better' than a soap opera, but merely different. Let's be quite clear about
this: despite the shortcomings of La Dolce Vita, it is in all respects
better. Soap opera should not be banned or even opposed, but we should
recognise it for what it is: rubbish.
</TEXT>
<PUB>The Financial Times
</PUB>
<PAGE>
London Page 13
</PAGE>
</DOC>
