ID: 73	RANK: 38	SCORE: 8.3285

<DOC>
<DOCNO> FBIS3-21007 </DOCNO>
<HT>    "jpest006___94044" </HT>


<HEADER>
<AU>   JPRS-EST-94-006 </AU>
Document Type:JPRS 
Document Title:Science &amp; Technology 

</HEADER>

<ABS>  Europe/International </ABS>
<DATE1>   9 March 1994 </DATE1>
<F P=100> WEST EUROPE </F>
<F P=101> TELECOMMUNICATIONS </F>
<H3> <TI>   Lasers Used to Communicate with Satellites </TI></H3>
<F P=102>  94WS0186A Duesseldorf VDI NACHRICHTEN in German 10 Dec 93 p 
20 </F>

<F P=103> 94WS0186A </F>
<F P=104>  Duesseldorf VDI NACHRICHTEN </F>


<TEXT>
Language: <F P=105> German </F>
Article Type:CSO 

<F P=106> ["Optical Communications with Satellites: Carl Zeiss Jena </F>
Technology Supports ARTEMIS Data Transmission"] 
  [Text] VDI-N Jena, 10 December 93, M.S. - When the ARTEMIS 
satellite is launched in 1996, the ESA (European Space Agency) 
will make practical tests of the effectiveness of laser 
technology in providing communications between the space 
vehicles themselves and between the satellites and the ground 
station. In late November, Carl Zeiss Jena will have delivered 
the one-meter mirror telescope to be used for this purpose at 
the ground station situated on the Tenerife volcanic massif. 
  In three years, when the ESA's ARTEMIS research satellite, 
equipped with the necessary transceiver module, has been put 
into a geostationary orbit, one of the most promising projects 
of European space research of this decade, designated Silex 
(Semiconductor Intersatellite Link Experiment) will get 
underway. For the first time in the civilian domain data will be 
transmitted directly via laser pulses between the French 
Earth-surveillance satellite Spot 4 and ARTEMIS. On board each 
satellite will be a 25-cm receiving mirror and laser operating 
in the 820-nm light wavelength band. In addition, using the same 
system, ARTEMIS will also be able to transmit the signals 
received further on to the ground station in the Canary Islands. 
From the Canaries, the data can then be transmitted by light 
waveguide, copper cable, or radio, whichever method is 
preferred, to subscribers worldwide. 
  German companies, too, especially Carl Zeiss Jena, which is 
responsible for the optical elements in Silex, have received 
important contracts through Dara (German Space Agency) for this 
project that will, providing the general tests with ARTEMIS are 
successful, be continued from late 1998 with the first 
commercial communications satellites. On the occasion of the 
delivery to Dara of the telescope, Dr. Elk Zittow, business 
manager, stated frankly: "This has been an enormously important 
contract for our astronomical instrumentation branch, which is 
currently being rebuilt." The instrument, which cost roughly 2 
million German marks [DM], is one of 14 contracts that the 
company is presently working on for the space program. It had 
been originally destined for an astronomical observatory in 
Kazakhstan. Since the original customer was no longer able to 
pay, Zeiss Jena modified the telescope for its new use. Anthony 
Dickinson, associated with ESA's technology center, sees many 
advantages in the use of laser light, which has already found 
many applications on the Earth. If free transmission is 
successful in orbit, not only would a reduction in energy use 
become possible through the better beaming of light but a 
greater degree of resistance to interference as well will be 
achieved. Moreover, the limitations on the available radio 
frequencies and their limited transmission capacity have 
compelled the search for such new approaches. 
  Dr. Fritz Merkle, Carl Zeiss business manager, expressed it 
this way: "An enormously important contract for our company, 
whose astronomy technology department, now being built up and 
directed in Jena, possesses technological know-how from both the 
West's and the East's space programs." 
  This participation in the European Silex Project is also a 
helpful contribution to the ongoing debate concerning Germany's 
competitiveness as a desirable industrial site. As Prof. Ralf 
Joachim, deputy business at Dara, put it: "In recent years there 
has been a double digit growth rate in the electronic satellite 
communications field internationally. Regrettably it has passed 
Germany by." Joachim continued: "We have to break away from our 
present `sub-critical' presence in the ESA; the successful 
engagement in Silex provides grounds for careful optimism." 
  Space research and technology, which is sometimes criticized 
and repeatedly threatened by funding cut-backs, truly advanced 
economic developments, especially in telecommunications. In 
Prof. Joachim's opinion, satellite-based data transmission plays 
"a key role in maintaining and expanding the competitiveness of 
our service and technological industries." A study prepared by 
the Euroconsult Company estimates that the world-wide market 
volume for civilian satellite communications systems will reach 
US$79 billion dollars in the coming decade, of which $55 billion 
alone will be for on-board systems. Of the approximately 144 new 
satellites to be built in this time frame, about 36 will 
originate in Europe. 
  It is Dara's conviction that German industry has--through 
its 
own efforts and with some outside funding--produced some 
outstanding achievements, such as Kopernikus, TV-Sat, and 
Symphonie, although, it must be admitted, with less satisfactory 
commercial spin-offs than hoped for. However, the competition 
remains very uneven because the United States and other 
countries can help support their space programs through high 
military development outlays and government technological 
programs. Consequently, German companies have to be especially 
innovative and advance new technologies. Optical communications 
represents one shining example of just such a new technology. 
  The ARTEMIS scenario, which ESA believes will become the 
reality after the successful conclusion of the test phase in 
late 1998, should bring urgently needed advantages for 
low-flying Earth reconnaissance satellites and for manned space 
flights as well. The ARTEMIS relay station will not only receive 
signals and transmit them in the conventional microwave manner 
to Earth, but will also ascertain whether the laser system will 
prove to be the preferred technique for reliable and rapid 
contacts and which frequencies are best. Finally, it is also 
conceivable that at some future point a laser optical system 
will also find use in distant missions. "We still do not know 
the practical limitations of this technology, but I'm convinced 
we will hear a lot more about it in the fullness of time," Dr. 
Fritz Merkle of Zeiss asserted. It is now quite clear that the 
laser system, by virtue of its lower power requirements, will 
permit the weight of communications equipment to be 
significantly reduced. This alone will open up completely new 
opportunities. 
  Closer at hand, of course, are the tests planned for late 
1995, when the Tenerife ground station is equipped with the 
Zeiss telescope. The instrument, as Mario Lopriore of the Estec 
space technology center pointed out to ESA, will most probably 
also be used to search for space junk. An accessory CCD camera, 
using the optical system of the telescope, reportedly will be 
able to detect remnant objects from older satellite or rocket 
engines from the centimeter range. 

</TEXT>

</DOC>
