ID: 84	RANK: 51	SCORE: 8.7515
<DOC>
<DOCNO>FT923-2535</DOCNO>
<PROFILE>_AN-CIQC8AATFT</PROFILE>
<DATE>920917
</DATE>
<HEADLINE>
FT  17 SEP 92 / Book Review: The contradictory Dr K
</HEADLINE>
<BYLINE>
   By ANDREW GOWERS
</BYLINE>
<TEXT>
KISSINGER: A BIOGRAPHY By Walter Isaacson Faber &amp; Faber. Pounds 25, 893
pages
In the annals of modern American statecraft, no one occupies a more
prominent place than Henry A Kissinger. For eight years under Presidents
Nixon and Ford he dominated the conception, formation and execution of US
foreign policy, at times appearing to act with an authority more solid than
that of the president himself. With Nixon, he extended, then terminated,
America's disastrous entanglement in Indochina, and as the Nixon
administration crumbled, he represented one of Washington's only anchors of
stable government. He initiated detente with Moscow and made the historic
opening to Beijing. Like some other-worldly chess player, he manipulated and
managed foreign crises more single-handedly than any US government officer
before or since.
Yet Kissinger's reputation remains as hotly contested today as it was when
he departed office in 1976. Still admired for his dazzling intellect and
sought after for his international expertise, he is also blamed for much
unnecessary slaughter in far-flung places and held responsible for a lasting
tendency towards duplicity in the US executive branch's handling of foreign
affairs. To his many critics, he is enduringly tainted with the bad smell
that stifled the Nixon presidency - the wire-taps, the petty in-fighting,
the lies.
Walter Isaacson's book is an attempt to pin down this contradictory and
elusive figure once and for all. It is, of course, not the first - if
anything the task is complicated by the existence of Kissinger's own
voluminous, highly readable but subjective memoirs, not to mention the large
corpus of sycophantic and bitterly hostile literature that has appeared in
the past 16 years. But it is undoubtedly the most successful. Isaacson, an
editor with Time magazine, writes with wit and insight; he is also greatly
helped by having had extensive access to his subject without conceding any
editorial control.
This is no hatchet job. The author has weighed the merits and the mistakes
of Kissinger's career. Nevertheless, the portrait that emerges is of a
deeply complex, even bizarre, personality: a mixture of preening arrogance
and foot-stamping paranoia; of irresistible charm, vindictiveness and an
almost pathetic desire to be liked; of strong, but highly changeable,
convictions.
Isaacson plausibly attributes many of these traits to Kissinger's early life
as a Jew in Nazi Germany, where 12 of his relatives perished. But in his
case the refugee's desire for recognition was a mania. As a young academic
at Harvard, he spent much time seeking to ingratiate himself with the
powerful and famous, and from his army days he attached himself to a series
of influential patrons who - recognising his brilliance - secured him
advancement. Having been adopted by the most important patron of all, he
craved celebrity, becoming the darling of the Georgetown dinner circuit, of
TV talk shows, and of the Hollywood starlets whom he conspicuously but
celibately dated.
These personality issues are central to an understanding of Kissinger's
statesmanship. Partly as a result of his background, his world view was
dark. He was heavily influenced by gloomy European thinkers such as
Spengler, and more or less consciously modelled himself on Metternich, of
whose aptitude for intrigue and manipulation he wrote approvingly while at
university. He felt strongly the need for international order, and dismissed
the moralistic or idealistic arguments that often prevail in US foreign
policy debates. This could lead to misjudgments: Kissinger's tendency to
view all regional conflicts through the prism of the cold war, for example,
even when there was no evidence of Moscow's hand, and his disregard for
home-grown political forces in countries he perceived as friends or foes.
What Kissinger felt most strongly of all, however, was his urge both to
command the stage and to direct the performance. His style was devious; he
preferred 'back channels' to formal diplomatic communication, stealth to
openness. On occasion this paid dividends by enabling Kissinger to cut
through the conventional wisdom. As Isaacson argues, the stunning China
initiative would not have been possible had it been conducted through
regular state department channels. But at other times, Kissinger seemed to
choose the cloak and dagger for their own sake. To quote Napoleon on
Metternich, he tended to 'confuse policy with intrigue'. As often as not,
the intrigue was directed at rivals within the administration.
Kissinger might respond to these charges by saying that the means were
justified by the end, which was to steer the US out of its Vietnam debacle
and establish a new balance of global power. In that he succeeded, for a
time. He was certainly more alive than most of his peers to the limits on
American power in the 1970s, and that remains an important legacy at a time
when the US may be on the brink of electing its first Vietnam-generation
president. Where Kissinger erred most substantially, perhaps, was in failing
to understand that Americans need a more compelling justification for an
active involvement in the outside world than his calculating realpolitik.
</TEXT>
<PUB>The Financial Times
</PUB>
<PAGE>
London Page 24
</PAGE>
</DOC>
