ID: 48	RANK: 79	SCORE: 6.7086
<DOC>
<DOCNO>FT924-4973</DOCNO>
<PROFILE>_AN-CK2AVAE9FT</PROFILE>
<DATE>921128
</DATE>
<HEADLINE>
FT  28 NOV 92 / Hawks &amp; Handsaws: Steeped in beauty beyond the Norm
</HEADLINE>
<BYLINE>
   By MICHAEL THOMPSON-NOEL
</BYLINE>
<TEXT>
I DON'T imagine I would ever spend Pounds 1m-plus on a David Hockney
painting, as some people have. And I think I agree with the critic who said
that while Hockney is 'one of the most successful and acclaimed artists of
his generation, in demand wherever today's western art finds a ready and
eager public,' he is also 'preposterously over-rated . . . superficial,
turning out a kind of 19th century saloon art refurbished from the stockroom
of modernism.'
But I like and admire Hockney, especially his mixture of bluntness and
sensitivity. And I enjoy what he says about art. Recently, in an interview,
he said he was not sure that tragedy was a suitable theme for painting.
'Strauss always said: 'I thought artists were for providing beauty'.'
Hockney described how he had been captivated by a small picture in the
Matisse exhibition in New York, a vase of flowers with a bust on a table. 'I
looked at the date, and it was 1942. And, of course, Europe was ripping
itself apart. But I thought: 'Well, I'm glad he painted it. I'm glad that
there was somebody . . . making something beautiful from the world around
him'.'
So inspired was I by Hockney's sentiments that this week I suddenly hurled
all the papers on my desk into the air, stabbed the computer Off button and
dashed in search of something beautiful. I rushed to the Tate Gallery, paid
Pounds 4, and dived into the Swagger exhibition - 300 years of grand manner
portraiture in Britain, from Van Dyck to Augustus John. 'Swagger'
portraiture can be showy and ostentatious, but also rhetorical, glamorous,
exuberant and sexy.
There are 79 paintings in this exhibition, all of them beautiful. You can
drown yourself in sumptuousness - Batoni, Zoffany, Reynolds, Gainsborough,
Millais, Sargent, and so on. I had only one bad moment. I was admiring Sir
Thomas Lawrence's Catherine Gray, Lady Manners (1794) when two twitterers
strode up to it. I expect they were part of the Barnes mob. The thing about
Lady Manners is that it sorts the men from the boys. It is glittery,
luscious and showy, the highlights of the dress laid on in thickly impasted
white. It even has a peacock.
Is it chocolate-box art, or something much weightier? Weightier, I rather
think. I find it immensely sad. But the Barnes pair were outraged. 'Dear God
in Heaven,' moaned the female, when confronted by Lady Manners. 'God, what a
mess. She looks like a chicken.' I have been known to start arguments in
galleries on less than that, but I let the fools go, so wrapped had I become
in the glamourousness of swagger.
I went home. I felt uplifted. I decided that for the next 24 hours I would
look only at beautiful things, would let the world and its sorrows pass by
unheeded.
Just as I was settling down, Miss Lee, my executive assistant, burst in.
Dressed in designer gear. Expensively rouged and carmined. Bosom rising and
falling. She had obviously been to Harvey Nicks with one of her dreadful
friends. 'The world is going mad,' said Miss Lee. 'The government is shaking
and heaving. Iraqgate's exploding. The French are revolting. And a comet's
heading for Earth.'
'I don't want to know,' I said gently. 'For 24 hours I am ignoring the world
and its comedies. I am steeping myself in beauty. Please don't disturb me.'
For the next four hours I idled through a favourite book, Ruskin Today, an
anthology chosen and annotated by Kenneth Clark 'to reintroduce this
fascinating and complex figure to the modern reader.' I read Ruskin on the
sacredness of colour - 'the loveliest (colour) is melancholy'; on the
snobbishness of English painters, and on the evil of decorating railway
stations.
At 7pm, Miss Lee burst into the room again. Her hair was awry. There were
Beaujolais stains on her front. 'Michael, you have got to snap out of your
reverie,' she shouted. 'Amazing things are happening. A dozen members of the
cabinet have assassinated Norman Lamont. They stabbed him at the Commons.
Heseltine plunged the first knife in, then Howard and Hurd and so forth.
Lamont did not go quietly. Squealed like a pig, they say. The blood you
wouldn't believe. Finally, John Major stepped from the shadows and finished
poor Norman off.'
I smiled kindly at my assistant. 'I am afraid you will have to remind me,' I
said. 'Who was Norman Lamont?'
</TEXT>
<PUB>The Financial Times
</PUB>
<PAGE>
London Page XXIV
</PAGE>
</DOC>
