ID: 8	RANK: 14	SCORE: 9.5643

<DOC>
<DOCNO> FBIS4-23081 </DOCNO>
<HT>      "jpust009___94045" </HT>


<HEADER>
<AU>   JPRS-UST-94-009 </AU>
JPRS 
Science &amp; Technology 

</HEADER>

<ABS>  Central Eurasia </ABS>
<DATE1>   18 April 1994 </DATE1>
<F P=100> ENGINEERING AND EQUIPMENT </F>
<F P=101> NUCLEAR AND NON-NUCLEAR ENERGY </F>
<H3> <TI>   Oil- and Gas-Bearing Systems of Subsalt Deposits of </TI></H3>
<HT><F P=107><PHRASE>    Oil- and Gas-Bearing Systems of Subsalt Deposits of </PHRASE></F></HT>


<TEXT>
Eastern   Margin of Pre-Caspian Depression 

<F P=102> 947F0068A Moscow GEOLOGIYA NEFTI I GAZA in Russian No. 10, 
1993 pp 4-10 </F>

<F P=103> 947F0068A </F>
<F P=104>  Moscow GEOLOGIYA NEFTI I GAZA </F>
<F P=105>  Russian </F>
CSO 

<F P=106> Article by I. B. Dalyan and Z. Ye. Bulekbayev, PGO </F>
Aktyubneftegazgeologiya UDC 681.036 
  [Abstract] The subsalt sedimentary mantle of the eastern 
margin of the Pre-Caspian Depression, down to a depth of 6,935 
m, in a stratigraphic structure ranging from the Lower Permian 
Artinskian Stage to the Lower Devonian, contains four identified 
lithologic-stratigraphic oil- and gas-bearing systems belonging, 
based on lithologic-facies features, to various formations with 
different geochemical sedimentation conditions, scattered 
organic matter content and degree of catagenesis, having 
generating argillaceous deposits and oil and gas horizons with 
various types of traps. Their ages and differentiation are based 
on micropaleontological and palinologic factors. Detailed 
descriptions of the various formations are given along with site 
locations and breakdowns of the oils, condensates and gases 
noted. Seismic surveying and core sampling are used. The subsalt 
system contains hydrocarbon accumulations and pools and has 
mantles of argillaceous deposits and dense aphanitic carbonates. 
The Lower Permian sand-and-clay deposit systems forms an 
enormous clinoform containing claystones with small interlayers 
of brownish-gray limestones, siltstones, sandstones and 
gritstones. The sandstone-siltstone deposits decrease in 
thickness from east to west and the gritstones, in the same 
direction, are being replaced by sandy varieties. The system's 
upper boundary runs along the bottom of a Lower Kungurian 
Substage anhydrite seam, a logging marker for the depression's 
eastern margin, and the lower runs along the roof of carbonates 
in the Zhanazholian tectonic stage and a gamma-emitting band of 
black terrigenous-siliceous-carbonaceous rocks in the rest of 
the eastern margin. Part of the Lower Permian deposit system 
overlies Gzhelian CL-I [Carbonate Layer I] rocks, some of which 
show facies replacement by same-age deep-sea sediments of the 
gamma-emitting band. The Lower Permian system covers the first 
gamma-emitting band, which is spread above the CL-II carbonates, 
which show facies replacement by deep-sea sediments further 
west, toward the depression's central part. A second 
gamma-emitting band below the first joins with it and covers 
Lower Carboniferous Tula Horizon terrigenous deposits. Lower 
Permian Sakmarian and Asselian deposits in the northern 
extension of the North Embian uplift are carbonates overlying 
the CL-I layer and covered by Middle Jurassic terrigenous 
deposits. The Lower Permian deposits, located between reflecting 
marker horizons, decrease in thickness from east to west and 
from south to north, with complete or partial erosion noted at a 
number of sites of the nearside zone of the Ostansuk depression, 
the result of uplifting of the eastern margin area which forms 
the Ural Folding System. The Lower Permian system gradually 
sinks from east to west, from 2.3 km at the Ashchisay Fracture 
confining the eastern part of the Pre-Caspian Depression to 5.6 
km at the Shubarkuduk tectonic stage. A diagram is given of 
various structural elements of the eastern margin, showing 
various eastern margin boundary factures, sites, deposits and 
uplifts with signs of oil and gas in subsalt deposits, 
identified and assumed sections lacking Lower Carboniferous 
terrigenous deposits and various tectonic stages. The isoclinal 
Ostansuk platform depression is in the northeastern section of 
the margin. The Lower Permian rock system is an oil source bed 
with a high concentration of organic matter, basically 
sapropelic with some humus, and the deposits also contain 
various bitumens (some traces of epigenic type) and iron 
components (ferrous, pyritic and ferric). Hydrocarbons in the 
system have migrated to traps. Reference horizons (sandstones 
and siltstones) 12-135 m thick contain oil-bearing horizons, 
three Artinskian, four Sakmarian and one Asselian. The 
oil-bearing layers have various filtration properties and flow 
rates. Lower Permian deposit oil pools are dome types, but 
erosion shearing may have resulted in stratigraphic oil pools 
shielded by Kungurian deposits. The system's oils are brown and 
dark brown, with traces of sulfur, paraffin, sulfate resins, 
silica gel and asphalts. The methane-naphthene oils' hydrocarbon 
composition consists mostly of carbon, hydrogen and oxygen with 
traces of sulfur and nitrogen. The Gzhelian-Late Visean 
carbonate rock system, widespread in the depression's eastern 
section, consists of two layers, separated by Lower Podolskian 
Horizon sand-and-clay deposits and located between reflecting 
layers, and they were formed under shallow sea-basin shelf 
conditions and subjected to erosion when they were above sea 
level. Various limestones (organogenic-clastic, polydetrital, 
clustered-lumpy and pelitomorphic) are present, with a few 
dolomites. Various permeable seam traps exist. The lower layer's 
carbonates show sulfate formation and tufagenous material is 
present (feldspar crystals and some quartz). The system's upper 
boundary runs along a roof of Gzhelian limestones and anhydrites 
and the lower along a floor of Upper Visean limestones which lie 
on top of Middle Visean Tula Horizon terrigenous rocks. The 
Gzhelian-Late Podolskian upper carbonate layer (CL-I), located 
between seismically reflecting layers, containing mostly 
carbonates, with anhydrites in the northeast and terrigenous 
deposits in the north, has four productive gas and oil pools 
20-50 m thick. Upper Carboniferous upper gas and oil pools have 
the best trap properties. Oils are mostly methane-naphthene 
types, with sulfur, paraffin, resins and some asphalt, basically 
composed of carbon and hydrogen with slight amounts of oxygen 
and nitrogen. Condensates are bright-yellow methane-naphthene 
types, sulfurous, low-paraffin and resinous. Gases are primarily 
methane, ethane and propane with lesser amounts of butane, 
pentane, hexane, nitorgen, carbon dioxide and hydrogen sulfide. 
Kashirian-Late Visean lower carbonate layer CL-II lies at depths 
ranging from 1,930 m to 5,280 m between reflecting layers and is 
divided by nine lithologic-stratigraphic horizons, with trap 
seams up to 70 m thick containing productive oil and gas pools 
and the seams separated by impermeable carbonates. Oils are 
greenish-brown methane-naphthene types, basically sulfurous, 
low-paraffin and slightly resinous with asphalts and composed of 
mostly carbon, hydrogen and oxygen, with a small amount of 
nitrogen. Condensates are bright-yellow and yellow 
methane-naphthene types, with small amounts of sulfur, paraffin 
and resins (up to 20 parts per 1000). Hydrocarbon gases are 
mostly methane and ethane with lesser amounts of propane, 
butane, pentane, nitrogen, carbon dioxide and hydrogen sulfide. 
CL-I and -II carbonate system oils are basically the same type 
with differences in physical and chemical properties and an 
increased sulfur content associated with secondary changes 
during vertical migration of the oil and the influence of 
carbonate rocks on the migration paths and in the pools. 
Sedimentation of CL-I and -II occurred under unfavorable 
conditions of a shallow coastal sea basin shelf under oxydizing 
and dynamic circumstances. The carbonate rock system is not an 
oil source and could not produce hydrocarbons, the pools of 
which formed by migration from a Lower Permian oil-source system 
and possibly partially from deeper Lower Carboniferous 
terrigenous rocks. CL-I and -II carbonates contain epigenetic 
asphalt from two production periods, the second an oil-type, 
bright yellow with a bluish tint, found in porous layers, 
fractures and caverns. Gas pools formed apparently due to a 
sharp pressure drop during the oil's migration from lower 
terrigenous deposits to the higher-situated carbonates. 
Gamma-emitting bands of terrigenous-siliceous-carbonate rocks, 
widely dispersed in the eastern part of the Pre-Caspian 
Depression, are deep-sea or relatively deep-sea age analogs of 
Carboniferous carbonate deposits, are located under Asselian 
deposits and are reference horizons with bituminous organic 
matter, a significant amount of which is sapropelic in nature 
and gives them a chestnut-brown color. Rocks of the first 
gamma-emitting band, 18-83 m thick, are analogs of the deep-sea 
facies replacement of CL-I carbonates and are above the CL-II 
carbonates. Deposits of the second gamma-emitting band, 78-102 m 
thick, are analogs of CL-II carbonates, are on top of Middle 
Visean Tula Horizon sand-and-clay deposits and include 
claystones, limestones, radiolarites, silicites and siltstones 
with tuff and volcanic ash. The first band (at the 5050-5102 m 
level) has redeposited Upper Carboniferous and Moscovian 
foraminifera and the second (at the 5102-5177 m level) has 
redeposited Middle and Lower Carboniferous foraminifera. The 
claystones are silicified and pyritized, black, strongly 
bituminous, oily to the touch, with siltstone interlayers and 
occasionally turn into radiolarites and silicites. The 
limestones are silicified, black, aphanitic, dense, oily to the 
touch, with calcite-filled fractures and interlayers of 
silicites. The radiolarites are silicified, occasionally 
pyritized, slightly argillaceous, dark chestnut-brown and gray, 
platy, thin-layered, dense and bituminous, with some replacement 
by chalcedony and opal. The gamma-emitting bands are highly 
bituminous, with sapropelic organic material at the 
mesocatagenesis substage, and can be listed among the 
oil-producing deposits. Oils are brownish-green, low-sulfur, 
slightly resinous, with paraffin and some asphalt, and basically 
methane-naphthene types. The Lower Carboniferous sand-and-clay 
rock system of the Tula Horizon-Tournaisian graywacke formation 
extends in the eastern margin to the south of the 
Shengelshiyskiy sublatitudinal fracture. Present are claystones, 
siltstones and sandstones with interlayers of conglomerates 
similar in color and composition to the silico-igneous formation 
of the Sakmarian zone of the Mugodzhary mountains. Deposit 
thickness is 448 m at Vostochnyy Akzhar, increases to the east, 
reaching 1,510 m at Zhanaton, and also increases to the west 
according to seismic surveying. Greatest deposit thickness of up 
to 4.5 km occurs in the Embian pericraton deflection. The Middle 
Visean-Tournaisian rock system surface is a reflecting layer 
with the lower boundary running along a base of terrigenous 
rocks on top of Upper Devonian carbonates. Middle 
Visean-Tournaisian argillaceous deposits have a high 
organic-matter concentration, sapropelic-humus type, accumulated 
under favorable coastal-sea geochemical conditions, are 
oil-producing types and liquid hydrocarbon production is evident 
in the eastern margin, especially intensively in the Embian 
deflection. Structures formed in this region by the time 
hydrocarbon production began should be viewed as zones of oil 
and gas accumulation of sygenetic pools and primary sites for 
oil and gas prospecting operations. Lower Carboniferous 
deposits, from which oil has been obtained, need more study. The 
oil and condensates are predicted to be low-sulfur types based 
on genetic features of scattered organic material in Lower 
Carboniferous sand-and-clay deposits. The Middle 
Visean-Tournaisian deposits' oils are syngenetic to the 
surrounding rock, brownish-green, low-sulfur, with paraffin and 
some asphalt, and basically methane-naphthene types. A table is 
presented, showing the depths of the occurrences, in meters, of 
oil- and gas-bearing systems of subsalt sedimentary mantle 
deposits at various sites, ranging from Lower Permian down to 
Prelower Devonian and including the gamma-emitting bands, the 
CL-I and -II carbonate layers, the Lower Carboniferous 
gamma-emitting claystones and the Devonian carbonates. Upper 
Devonian carbonate system is between one set of reflecting 
horizons and Middle and Lower Devonian systems are between 
another set and are basically limestones with interlayers of 
claystones and organic matter and oil ooze in the fractures. 
Prelower Devonian deposits are dark-green-to-black dioritic 
porphyrites with calcite-filled fractures. Most of the rocks are 
plagioclase (andesites) with some hornblende, quartz and 
biotite, secondary minerals such as actinolite, apatite, 
chlorite and epidote, and accessory minerals such as magnetite, 
titanomagnetite and pyrite. The dioritic porphyrites have been 
subjected to dynamic metamorphism. The subsalt sedimentary 
mantle has three rock systems with high generating potential, in 
which hydrocarbon-generating processes have occurred and 
hydrocarbon traps are present. Lower Carboniferous terrigenous 
deposits have a greater production potential than Lower Permian. 
The gamma-emitting layers need more study. The depression's 
eastern section has four regional oil- and gas-bearing subsalt 
rock systems and shows some promise for discoveries of new 
hydrocarbon accumulations in the eastern margin. Structural 
formations arose much earlier than hydrocarbon production and 
endured some reorganization and disruption of the hydrodynamic 
conditions as shown by heavy oxydized residual oil in Lower 
Permian deposits. Deep-seated fractures are believed to be 
indicative of possible oil and gas fields, should help in future 
prospecting for oil pools and may also be helpful in locating 
new pools in CL-I and -II layers. Slopes of bulges and uplift 
areas which formed covering structures on Lower Carboniferous, 
Devonian and much older deposits may be promising for 
prospecting for stratigraphic oil pools. Figures 2. 


</TEXT>

</DOC>
