ID: 7	RANK: 84	SCORE: 6.6643

<DOC>
<DOCNO> FBIS4-46662 </DOCNO>
<HT>    "jpusp005___94013" </HT>


<HEADER>
<AU>   JPRS-USP-94-005 </AU>
JPRS 
Science &amp; Technology 

</HEADER>

<ABS>  Central Eurasia: Space </ABS>
<DATE1>    19 May 1994 </DATE1>
<F P=100> SPACE SCIENCES </F>
<H3> <TI>   Russian, European Scientists Discuss Asteroid, Planetary </TI></H3>
<HT><F P=107><PHRASE>    Russian, European Scientists Discuss Asteroid, Planetary </PHRASE></F></HT>


<TEXT>
Missions 

<F P=102>   947Q0130A Moscow ROSSIYSKIYE VESTI in Russian 19 May 94 p 5 </F>
<F P=103> 947Q0130A </F>
<F P=104>  Moscow ROSSIYSKIYE VESTI </F>
<F P=105>  Russian </F>
CSO 

<F P=106> [Article by Vadim Chernobrov: "Next Stop -- `Asteroid Belt'"] </F>
  [Text] It is as simple to enumerate the stages in the 
development of cosmonautics as it is easy to foresee the further 
route of attack in the song "We took Warsaw by storm, passed 
through the entire city and read the last street name . . . ." 
In actuality, man is moving into the unbounded expanses of the 
universe in short careful jumps. First we launched 
reconnaissance vehicles into space, then to the closest 
celestial body -- the moon, and only then to the planets in a 
strict sequence, depending on the range. And landings of space 
vehicles on these bodies took place in the same sequence, none 
were skipped: Moon (1959), Venus (1966), Mars (1971). The next 
in turn, with the numbers "5" and "6," were Mercury and Jupiter, 
but the closest of all was "number 4" -- not a planet, but 
something like a real jumble, a mass of space trash known as the 
"asteroid belt." 
  So, in any case, it was thought earlier. In the past century 
astronomers noticed an empty unoccupied place between Mars and 
Jupiter, wanted to discover a planet there, but instead found . 
. . thousands of fragments. Arguments about their origin are 
still continuing: these are either remnants of the exploding 
planet Phaeton or "semifinished material" -- nonadhering pieces 
for constructing a planetary body. The arguing parties agreed on 
only one thing: it was assumed that the asteroid belt would not 
allow the passage of spaceships because they inevitably would 
collide with some small piece of rock, which at great velocities 
is equivalent to an encounter with a land mine. But now four 
emissaries from the Earth have passed through this mine field 
and the fifth is in flight. And this demonstrates that the Earth 
is not at all blocked from outer space by an impenetrable wall. 
Breathing more calmly, specialists already intended to forget 
about the irritating interference on the path to the giant 
planets, but . . . . 
  . . . But the scientists of the Moscow Aviation Institute 
and 
Hesse University (FRG), meeting together, thought a little and 
decided that the minor planets, of which the asteroid belt 
consists, is of enormous interest for science. In actuality, 
whereas ordinary planets during the billions of years of 
evolution, as a result of strong gravitational compression, 
internal heating and chemical reactions, have not retained a 
trace of the primordial matter of the protoplanetary cloud, on 
the tiny cosmic bodies, with a total absence of an atmosphere, 
any matter should be preserved almost eternally. 
  If we learn the composition of these space "preserves" and 
compare it with today's state of the Earth's deeper layers, many 
geological riddles about our own planet will become 
understandable. It is one thing to trace changes in the Earth 
over the course of tens of years and something else to learn 
about events which occurred billions of years ago. It appears 
that for geologists it is far more important to make a a soil 
analysis for asteroids, absolutely dissimilar to the Earth, than 
for planets similar to ours. 
  Such a thought is evident for scientists throughout the 
world. In any case, this was true at a second Russian-German 
conference held recently in Moscow and devoted to these 
problems, attended by specialists from the United States, Great 
Britain, Italy, France and Japan. It goes without saying that it 
is not enough to study these space stones; it is necessary to 
know further how to get our hands on this material itself. The 
fact is that the ordinary chemical rocket engines by means of 
which all our flights into space have been made have now already 
almost attained the peak of their possibilities. The farther we 
glance into space, the more we sense our helplessness. Flight 
with modern engines to the outskirts of the solar system may 
last for tens of years. Is it possible to fly by developing a 
higher-velocity engine and getting to the goal sooner? 
  Most of the conferees see an electric rocket engine as such 
an alternative. And among all the proposed variants the most 
advantageous proved to be the following variant: the body of the 
spacecraft, scientific equipment and instruments are to be 
fabricated by the Lavochkin Plant, Messerschmidt and other 
European concerns. As a booster for entry into orbit it was 
decided to use our Proton, but as the power plant for the entire 
complex -- a Topaz nuclear reactor. The engine also was 
selected. Here the plasma accelerator proved to be ahead of all 
the rest. 
  When the entire world learned of the invention of this new 
class of accelerators by Professor Aleksey Morozov in the 
1970's, it was decided that the results of the experiments be 
put to practical use at once. Now, however, when the time had 
come to compare the results and simultaneously lay out on the 
table the tens of reports on the tests, an objective jury gave 
preference to the quasistationary P50A "Giperboloid" 
accelerator, constructed at the Scientific Research Institute of 
Applied Mechanics and Electrodynamics of the Moscow Aviation 
Institute. Gari Popov, scientific research institute director, 
was extremely restrained in his evaluations. He declared to a 
ROSSIYSKIYE VESTI corespondent that he had no doubt about the 
competence of his specialists, they dealt beautifully with the 
scientific-production problems but ahead was the most difficult 
stage of marketing and sale of products with a high scientific 
content, which remains unmastered by the Russians. 
  In actuality, whereas in purely technical knowledge Russian 
and Ukrainian scientists have simply had no equals, our 
professors, to speak bluntly, have not been too brilliant in 
elementary entrepreneurship. Petr Tsygankov, a specialist at the 
Technical University imeni Bauman, after the next report of 
foreign luminaries, bitterly joked: "Everything on which they 
are working there, that which they only intend to do after many 
years and on which they are spending millions of dollars, 
already has long gathered dust on the shelf in our country. Let 
them come to us, for 10 000 we will not only blow dust from an 
absolutely finished item, but also wrap it up . . . ." 
  To be sure, the funding of our science, which is extremely 
far from ideal, is responsible for all. So is it possible to 
advise our specialists to leave space at rest, so to speak, to 
better times? Especially since the accumulated experience is 
sufficient for fully satisfying "terrestrial" orders. Due to all 
these same space technologies the Applied Mechanics and 
Electrodynamics Scientific Research Institute now can perform 
the spraying of virtually any material on any base. Imagine for 
yourself what a scope this gives production people. The 
Americans have already acquired such apparatus in our country 
for the spraying of gold; now they are looking very closely at 
the "plasma boiler" made in Moscow. 
  But the greatest stroke of luck for scientists is 
unquestionably the contracts from which they will receive 
well-deserved money for ... their principal work -- the 
designing of space equipment. Indeed, whereas in economic fields 
there are an enormous number of competitors, there are not many 
who prefer to deal with superdistant space flights -- they are 
technically too complex. 
  Judge for yourselves: approximately in the year 2000 an 18-m 
spacecraft with a nuclear reactor and as a minimum five engines 
sets off on its trajectory with a constant acceleration. After 
two years it will approach the asteroids, each time even out its 
velocity near each body, select the most typical from among 
them, release a descent module to reach its surface, which then, 
using a liquid-propellant rocket engine, will return to the 
Earth. The nuclear ship itself, however, will wander in space, 
seeking out and studying newer and newer celestial bodies as 
long as the fuel in its reactor suffices. 
  In the opinion of Gari Popov, the planned mission is so 
multiaspect that the ship intended for it can fully execute a 
flight to virtually any place in the solar system. Bartelli 
Chezeri, a representative of the European Space Agency, revealed 
the secret that his organization already has on hand 53 
proposals for making flights into distant space for different 
scientific missions: study of the satellites of Jupiter, the 
rings of Saturn, search for gravity waves, neutrinos, etc. And 
this means that they can be regarded as potential orders for the 
planned vehicle, which in turn, could become the first 
standard-produced general-purpose ship for the solar system. 
  Europe feels that Russia is the best candidate for carrying 
out such an interplanetary mission. But will Russian scientists 
live to see its beginning? Recently, incidentally, they learned 
that ordinary aluminum spoons from a student's dining table, 
covered with gold in space engines, can be sold to cooperative 
kiosks. It is true that there are no forks. They have already 
disappeared for three years from Moscow institutes. But there 
are so many spoons that I am calm for Russian space science and 
industry. They will suffice right up to the year 2000. 

</TEXT>

</DOC>
