ID: 39	RANK: 92	SCORE: 11.1749

<DOC>
<DOCNO> FBIS3-40677 </DOCNO>
<HT>    "jpnea005___94061" </HT>


<HEADER>
<AU>   JPRS-NEA-94-005 </AU>
Document Type:JPRS 
Document Title:Near East &amp; South Asia 

</HEADER>

<ABS>  INDIA: Press Reaction to GATT Signing INDIA </ABS>
<DATE1>   2 February 1994 </DATE1>
<F P=100> SOUTHERN REGION </F>
<H3> <TI>   Former Finance Minister Decries GATT </TI></H3>
<F P=102>  94P50087A Madras INDIAN EXPRESS in English 03 Jan 94 p 8 </F>
<F P=103> 94P50087A </F>
<F P=104>  Madras INDIAN EXPRESS </F>


<TEXT>
Language: <F P=105> English </F>
Article Type:CSO 

<F P=106> [Commentary by Madhu Dandavate: "Developing Nations' Lot: </F>
Disquieting Outcome of GATT Negotiations"] 
  [Text] The GATT negotiations have clearly brought out two 
significant features--first, the intimidating power of the 
developing countries, particularly the United States, and 
second, the vulnerability of the developing nations to the 
pressures of the developed countries in their anxiety not to 
face isolation in the global economy. Looking out the outcome of 
the GATT negotiations, what is most discrnible is the colossal 
failure of India in initiating united and sustained efforts by 
all the developing countries, to protect their common interests 
in the face of onslaught by the giants. 
  The GATT approach regarding agriculture is most 
discriminatory. It would limit subsidies only to the upper layer 
of 10 per cent of the value of the agricultural output for the 
developing countries. This would rob the poor farmers of subsidy 
because with increasing cost of energy and other outputs, the 
sectorwise subsidy may exceed this limit. 
  The Dunkel proposal prescribes that the developing countries 
like India must import agricultural commodities to the extent of 
two per cent of domestic consumption in the first year of the 
GATT agreement to be stepped up to 3.33 per cent at the end of 
six years. The proposed relaxation of this condition about 
imports in the case of economies facing balance of payments 
crisis is not of much avail to India since our Finance 
Ministry's perception of BOP [balance of payments] crisis is 
that it is already overcome. 
  Another disturbing aspect is that insistence on procurement 
and sale of food-grains at market prices will imperil the very 
existence of the public distribution system despite the 
assurance that it will not be disrupted. There is a lot of 
ambiguity about the freedom of the farmers to multiply, exchange 
and sell the seeds. The assurance secured from GATT, even on the 
basis of the version of the Union Cabinet Minister, seems to be 
only in regard to multiplication and exchange of seeds and not 
in regard to their commercial sale. The interests of the 
agriculturalists demand that while handling the problem of 
application of the intellectual property rights to agriculture, 
the traditional rights of Indian farmers for preservation, free 
exchange and sale of seeds must remain inviolate. 
  The acceptance of the Dunkel proposal to change the 
process-oriented law, as for instance the Indian Patents Act 
(1970), to the product-oriented law will be very harmful. For 
instance, in drug industry which is subject to product patent 
law, the product patent holders will use their monopoly to 
effect sharp rise in the prices of drugs. 
  The Union Commerce Minister's contention that 80 per cent of 
the medicines were outside the ambit of the patent law does not 
make the exorbitant rise in prices of the rest of the drugs in 
any way less irksome. Merely by imposing the proposed selective 
licensing and controlquite rigid in nature, the spiralling of 
prices of drugs cannot be checked.There is every danger that 
India's growing indigenous drug industry may be swarmed by 
foreign multinationals. Under the new patent regime suggested by 
GATT, the interests of product patent holders will get 
precedence over public interest. 
  The present 1970 Patents Act based on patenting the process 
and not the product needs to be protected. The extension of the 
patent law to 20 years will adversely affect the research and 
development activities. It is also essential that micro-organism 
and biological process should be kept out of the purview of the 
patent law. On the insistence of the US, GATT has provided for 
phasing out of the multi-fibre arrangement (MFA) that governs 
exports of textiles over a 10-year period in place of a longer 
period of 15 years suggested earlier. However, this so called 
concession of reducing the time frame by five years has been 
offered only after securing an assurance from India to cut down 
import duties on synthetic textiles, thus providing the US entry 
into India's domestic market. This is bound to affect the market 
for the goods of the indigenous textile industry in India. The 
agreement on textiles is likely to adversely affect India 
because the transition period of ten years before the eventual 
opening up of the textile trade is substantially large and again 
the opening up was back-loaded, that is, the actual opening 
taking place only at the end of the ten-year period of 
transition. One cannot ignore the fact that formation of 
regional groupings like NAFTA [North American Free Trade 
Association] will result in the abolition of tariff barriers for 
member countries while maintaining for other countries in the 
GATT system the quota and the tariff regime. This is most 
harmful to India's textile trade. 
  The TRIMS [Trade Related Investment Measures] in the Dunkel 
proposal restrict power of the Government to regulate and 
control foreign investment. The provisions of the Dunkel draft 
accepted by GATT give a privileged position to foreign investors 
as compared to our own investors. While the foreign investors 
will operate with backing of their respective governments and 
will have the benefit of low interest rates, they will have no 
obligation either to abide by the indigenous content regulations 
or to make compulsory exports. The proposal for setting up of an 
Monetary trade organization (MTO) with the integrated dispute 
settlement mechanism would also allow cross-retaliation between 
the three areas of intellectual property-rights, goods, and 
services. 
  The dispute settlement mechanism as provided in MTO is 
heavily weighed against the developing countries like India. 
They can easily be subjected to cross-retaliation whereas they 
have no means to retaliate against the developed countries. We 
should therefore not be surprised if the unilateral use of the 
instrument of the special and Super 301 by the US is replaced by 
similar coercive retaliation by the multilateral instrument 
under MTO. 
  The agreement finalised by GATT is a sad reminder of how 
`Might is Right.' This can never be the motto of global bodies 
which aspire to build harmonious and congenial relations between 
various regions of the tension-ridden world on the basis of 
justice and equity. In the GATT document, one sees neither the 
liberal ethos nor the far-sighted vision of Willy Brandt, who 
produced the monumental Brandt Commission report on 
International Development Issues. 

</TEXT>

</DOC>
