ID: 7	RANK: 48	SCORE: 7.7400

<DOC>
<DOCNO> FBIS4-46667 </DOCNO>
<HT>    "jpusp005___94018" </HT>


<HEADER>
<AU>   JPRS-USP-94-005 </AU>
JPRS 
Science &amp; Technology 

</HEADER>

<ABS>  Central Eurasia: Space </ABS>
<DATE1>    21 June 1994 </DATE1>
<F P=100> SPACE POLICY, ADMINISTRATION </F>
<H3> <TI>   Future of Russian Space Program Linked to Cooperation With </TI></H3>
<HT><F P=107><PHRASE>    Future of Russian Space Program Linked to Cooperation With </PHRASE></F></HT>


<TEXT>
West 

<F P=102>   947Q0112A Moscow NOVOYE VREMYA in Russian No 14, Apr 94 pp 
20-21 </F>

<F P=103> 947Q0112A </F>
<F P=104>  Moscow NOVOYE VREMYA </F>
<F P=105>  Russian </F>
CSO 

<F P=106> [Article by Sergey Leskov; "Russian Cosmonautics, It Seems </F>
To Be Surviving. But Western Contracts Constitute Its Principal 
Capital"] 
  [Text] During recent months the principal events in 
cosmonautics have not been occurring in orbit, but in government 
offices. Indeed, as never before the fate of cosmonautics is 
dependent not so much on successful technical solutions as on 
the good will of the politicians. 
  Viktor Chernomyrdin, prime minister of Russia, and Albert 
Gore, vice president of the United States, in December 1993 
signed an executive agreement on joint work on the Alpha orbital 
station. Late in March 1994 Nursultan Nazarbayev, the president 
of Kazakhstan, and Boris Yeltsin, president of Russia, signed an 
agreement on the manner of operation of the Baykonur cosmodrome. 
Despite the outward unrelated character of these two agreements, 
they are closely linked to one another and in the absence of one 
of them the other becomes senseless. 
  Observers are unanimous that the final protocol of the 
agreement with Kazakhstan is advantageous for Russia, which 
succeeded in sticking by virtually all its interests. The 
military personnel of the Military Space Forces of Russia will 
even service the cosmodrome, located in the territory of another 
country. The term of the lease, 20 years, with subsequent 
renewal for another 10 years, also corresponds to the needs of 
Russia. And finally, the lease payment of 115 million dollars 
annually, instead of the 150 million asked for by Kazakhstan, 
evidently will not be too burdensome for Russia because some of 
the money will be recouped in space services. 
  Why during the prolonged conflict about Baykonur has Russia 
held out this way for the cosmodrome, lost in the waterless 
steppes, and has more than once placed the good relations with 
Kazakhstan in danger? It is not at all due to nostalgic memories 
of the glorious past of Soviet cosmonautics, which was 
associated with this place. Administration of Baykonur is an 
endless headache. Everything there is falling down, everything 
needs major repairs. Specialists dissatisfied with their fate 
are working there and serious troop mutinies flare up. But 
despite all the problems only Baykonur can really ensure the 
survival of Russian cosmonautics. 
  However, Russia also has the Plesetsk cosmodrome in 
Arkhangelsk Oblast. Already long ago more satellites were 
launched from the nine launch pads at Plesetsk than from 
Baykonur. The Soyuz, Molniya, Tsiklon and Cosmos boosters, which 
put ten kinds of scientific and economic satellites into orbit, 
are launched from there. Most of the military satellites are 
launched from Plesetsk. One shortcoming is that Plesetsk today 
cannot service large boosters of the Energiya, Proton and Zenit 
types. And it is precisely these boosters which constitute the 
main hope of the space branch under conditions of a general 
economic decline. It is precisely these boosters which are 
attracting the attention of the Western partners of Russia and 
promise a vitally necessary inflow of contracts and foreign 
exchange. 
  During the last month Russian military people have 
insistently advanced the idea of constructing a new cosmodrome, 
"Svobodnyy-18," at a base of the former rocket army near 
Komsomolsk-na-Amure. This idea has its advantages. First of all, 
the geographical location, in latitude close to Baykonur. In the 
case of a launch from the northern site at Plesetsk 
10-15% more 
fuel is expended than in the case of a launch into the same 
orbit from Baykonur or from "Svobodnyy." In addition, the 
closeness of "Svobodnyy" to the southeastern region, whose 
countries have recently expressed increasingly active interest 
in their own space research, is attractive. But Russia is faced 
with building a new cosmodrome with a near-empty treasury. As a 
result of the remoteness of the Russian Far East each stone at 
such a cosmodrome, as stated by Boris Ostroumov, deputy director 
of the Russian Space Agency, will be more costly than a diamond. 
  Soviet cosmonautics, however insistently the official 
propaganda conveyed the idea that it had exclusively peaceful 
purposes, at all times was structurally a component part of the 
defense industry. It is precisely this which explains why 
cosmonautics in the USSR never experienced difficulties with 
funding and all programs invariably were discussed in the 
Military-Industrial Commission of the USSR Council of Ministers. 
It is not at all surprising that together with the entire 
defense establishment cosmonautics also was plunged into a deep 
crisis. By 1993 up to 40% of the personnel had departed 
from a 
branch where elite specialists traditionally worked. It is 
impossible to estimate the scales of hidden unemployment; at 
many enterprises a shortened work week has been introduced and 
specialists are on unpaid leaves for a long time. One can only 
guess about budgeted funding because the money is doled out 
quarterly and is received with a great delay, already being 
devalued. World-level scientists are making both ends meet by 
concluding contracts for small household appliances having 
nothing in common with science. 
  On the other side of the ocean the American space program 
has 
encountered its difficulties. Ten billion dollars have already 
been spent on developing the Freedom orbital station, but it has 
not been possible to arrive at a final version. Settling down in 
the White House, president B. Clinton demanded a sharp reduction 
in the funding for this ambitious project. In March 1993 the 
idea was first expressed that there should be close cooperation 
in space research between Russia and the United States, formerly 
steering clear of one another. The swiftness in concluding an 
agreement is attributable only to the desperation in which the 
leaders of world cosmonautics found themselves. 
  The agreement, to run for four years, provides for orders 
worth 400 million dollars to be placed at Russian space 
enterprises. This sum guarantees work for 60-70 thousand 
persons. Construction of the Alpha orbital station is to begin 
in 1997; it will operate as a minimum up to 2010, which also 
will enable Russia to receive advantageous orders in the future. 
Provision is made for flights of Russian cosmonauts in the Space 
Shuttle and American astronauts in the Mir. The first flight of 
the Americans is planned for the spring of 1995 and it will last 
for several months. It must be said that the access of the 
Americans to the methods used in long-term flights and life 
support systems is causing acute arguments among Russian 
specialists desiring to keep their first place in this field. 
  At the same time, an agreement was reached between the NPO 
Khrunichev and the Lockheed Corporation, very large enterprises 
in their respective countries, on commercial launches of the 
world's most reliable Proton booster, and a number of other 
contracts of a more local character have been signed. In 
concluding an agreement with INMARSAT on the launch of a 
communication satellite for 36 million dollars, Russia broke the 
monopoly on these services held by the French Ariane Space 
Corporation, which demanded 60 million for this launch. 
  With each passing month it is becoming increasingly evident 
that in the multiheaded Russian military-industrial complex, 
which is in a state of rapid decline, it is the space branch 
which is breathing easiest of all. Among many of the pioneers of 
cosmonautics the prospects of the branch being dependent on 
Western subsidies is a source of irritation. With an involuntary 
sigh it is possible to answer with the words of Yuriy Koptev, 
the director of the Russian Space Agency: 
  "Our dilemma is simple: either bring large-scale space 
research to a halt with time or join in with international 
cooperation, which, incidentally, the entire civilized world 
prefers." 

</TEXT>

</DOC>
