ID: 85	RANK: 72	SCORE: 4.3593

<DOC>
<DOCNO> FBIS4-66785 </DOCNO>
<HT>      "jpnea027___94026" </HT>


<HEADER>
<AU>   JPRS-NEA-94-027 </AU>
JPRS 
Near East &amp; South Asia 

</HEADER>

<ABS> </ABS>
<DATE1>     29 April 1994 </DATE1>
<F P=100> SOUTH ASIA </F>
<F P=101> INDIA </F>
<H3> <TI>   U.S. Intentions in South Asia Analyzed </TI></H3>
<HT><F P=107><PHRASE>    U.S. Intentions in South Asia Analyzed </PHRASE></F></HT>

<F P=102>   94AS0281A Varanasi AJ in Hindi 29 Apr 94 p 6 </F>
<F P=103> 94AS0281A </F>
<F P=104>  Varanasi AJ </F>
<F P=105>  Hindi </F>


<TEXT>
CSO 

<F P=106> [Article by Nikhil Chakarvarty: "America's Intentions in </F>
South Asia"] 
  [Text] The United States of America has a large battalion 
of thinkers that has access to an extensive pool of information. 
It is believed that this large battalion of thinkers help form 
public opinion and government policies. However, what do we 
learn when the question of actual implementation of these ideas 
arises? We learn that the Clinton administration, despite the 
presence of this large think tank, is showing a surprising lack 
of maturity in its policies dealing with the world. It rarely 
got any praise for its action in Somalia and its reputation was 
not enhanced in Bosnia. Improper action in North Korea also 
deprived it from any possible glory. As for its policy on China, 
it has not demonstrated any tendency towards an encouraging or 
authentic policy. Similarly, the Clinton administration has not 
earned any respect in dealing with Japan over their ugly and 
improper trade war. The fall of Mr. Hosokawa's from his position 
as prime minister has not helped Mr. Clinton's policy on Japan, 
that is if a policy does exist. 
  Against this dubious background, Deputy Secretary Strobe 
Talbott's recent visit to India and Pakistan was a simple 
exercise and did not hint about any new outlook on South Asia. 
Even if we grant that he was more careful and conventional 
compared to his emotional assistant, his trip has not show any 
new direction. We can say that Strobe Talbott came here and saw 
everything, however, unlike Julius Caesar, he did not conquer. 
  In New Delhi, putting a brave front, he tried to assure us 
that "Washington wants to improve relations with India for 
better relations, and wants to do the same with Pakistan." In 
other words, New Delhi should not worry about what Washington is 
doing with Islamabad. It also means that India has nothing to do 
with or worry about what the United States is giving or not 
giving to Pakistan. Similarly, Pakistan should also consider any 
agreement or dealings between India and the United States as 
unimportant. This issue should be considered a bilateral issue 
by both countries. This argument appears to be good on paper, 
however, in reality it is oversimplification of the issue. When 
the United States and Pakistan signed an agreement in the 50s, 
Jawaharlal Nehru had opposed it and told President Eisenhower 
that the dangers of Cold War were being brought to this region 
by this treaty. The U.S. argument was that this would help 
Pakistan fight the communist power. The hint was that Pakistan 
had to deal with the Soviet Union, and not with its neighbor 
India. Krishna Menon had expressed his memorable reaction to 
this U.S. action. He had said that he had never faced a gun that 
can be fired only in one direction. He had also said that supply 
of arms to Pakistan was a cause of concern for India. The fact 
is that even after the end of the Cold War, Pakistan's strategic 
importance to the Pentagon's future plan has not diminished in 
the context of Central Asia and the Persian Gulf. The United 
States needs a place to set its foot in the vast area between 
Xinkiang and Iran. It needs a credible reason also, which only 
Pakistan can provide. Washington also believes that only the 
military can provide both stability and reliability in Pakistan. 
The latest offer to modernize its Air Force and provide it F-16s 
and other military equipment help meet this dual goal. United 
States' most trusted and stable group in Pakistan can be kept 
happy and a very important watchtower to protect the U.S. 
interests in this crucial region will be strengthened. 
  During Talbott's talks in New Delhi, it was felt in the 
capital that the maneuver of getting Pakistan's agreement to cap 
its nuclear program in exchange for providing it F-16s will not 
be successful because no Pakistani government will be ready to 
give up its nuclear program. Still, after the talks in Pakistan, 
which Talbott called fully successful,' it appears that the 
Clinton administration is very eager to provide F-16s and other 
lethal weapons to Pakistan immediately. Efforts are being made 
in the U.S. Congress to suspend the Pressler amendment in order 
to supply these. The fact is that the main pressure on the 
Clinton administration is to ensure the sale of the productions 
of the huge U.S. airplane and missile industry. Senator Pressler 
has already unmasked this fact, especially in the context of 
supplying F-16s to Pakistan. Should Narasimha Rao desire, as 
some of his advisors would want, President Clinton can also 
provide India with a batch of those fighter planes or send other 
kinds of planes to India. In this context, we should not forget 
that the noise made over the cryogenic engine deal with Russia 
and forcing it to back out of the contract, was all done to help 
boost the sale of American rocket manufacturers. India is being 
pressured to give up its missile program for this same reason. 
The U.S. weapon industry that President Clinton wants to 
encourage and advance has this inherent reasoning, "If you need 
rockets or missiles, we are ready to sell you our products. Why 
are you making rockets and missiles?" 
  Now the question naturally arises: What is the reason for 
publicizing these efforts to halt Pakistan's nuclear program? 
Talbott had made it clear in New Delhi that the deal with 
Pakistan should be seen as a deal which has some strict and 
clear conditions. This condition is Pakistan's clear agreement 
to halt its nuclear program before the F-16s are supplied to it. 
He clarified this idea further two days later in Islamabad. In a 
very carefully expressed criticism he had made it clear that 
agreement to initiate U.S. proposals has been made. He also said 
that the goal of joint efforts was to expand on that 
understanding. 

</TEXT>

</DOC>
