ID: 39	RANK: 95	SCORE: 10.8520

<DOC>
<DOCNO> FBIS4-42225 </DOCNO>
<HT>    "drweu105_h_94012" </HT>


<HEADER>
<AU>   FBIS-WEU-94-105 </AU>
Daily Report 
<DATE1>  2 May 1994 </DATE1>

</HEADER>

<F P=100> GERMANY </F>
<H3> <TI>   Political, Management Style Noted </TI></H3>
<HT><F P=107><PHRASE>    Political, Management Style Noted </PHRASE></F></HT>

<F P=102>   94EN0361A Frankfurt/Main FRANKFURTER RUNDSCHAU in German 2 
May 94 p 10 </F>

<F P=103> 94EN0361A </F>
<F P=104>  Frankfurt/Main FRANKFURTER RUNDSCHAU </F>
<F P=105>  German </F>


<TEXT>
CSO 

<F P=106> [Excerpts from new book, Rudolf Scharping, the SPD, </F>
and Power (Chapter 1), by Thomas Leif and Joachim Raschke: 
"The Scharping System--Loyalties Must Be Cultivated: On the Work 
Methods of Rudolf Scharping, Minister-President of 
Rhineland-Palatinate and Chancellor Candidate of the SPD"] 
  [Text] Exactly how does Rudolf Scharping, 
minister-president of Rhineland-Palatinate, party chairman of 
the SPD [Social Democratic Party of Germany], and chancellor 
candidate, engage in politics? Who advises him and who belongs 
to his closest staff? What does his political style look like? 
In the Rororo Aktuell book Rudolf Scharping, die SPD und 
die Macht [Rudolf Scharping, the SPD, and Power], Thomas 
Leif and Joachim Raschke describe the "system" of government 
between Mainz and Bonn. We document from the first chapter of 
the book that is being presented in Bonn today, Monday, by 
Joschka Fischer and Peter Glotz. 
<H5>  The Scharping System: Knowledge Is Power </H5>
  "It is noteworthy that Rudolf Scharping looks at the trees 
before he expresses himself on the state of the forest. This is 
a special talent, and I know no other person who stores so much 
detailed knowledge and does not thereby lose sight of the main 
idea and the concept." This respectful assessment comes from 
Edgar Meister, former Hesselbach consultant, manager in the BGAG 
[expansion unknown] trade union holding company, and banker and 
subsequently finance minister in Scharping's cabinet. Since the 
end of 1993, Meister has belonged to the Bundesbank board of 
directors. By the way, the other cabinet members likewise have 
more than mere respect for the enormous storage capacity of his 
memory. They often fear Scharping's "weapon of knowledge." 
  Dieter Kretschmer, chairman of the German Federation of 
Trade 
Unions in Rhineland-Palatinate, goes even further: "He scrapes 
the knowledge from your mind," he admits. "Afterwards he knows 
everything down to the last period and comma." Of course he is 
"very late" in deciding and considers everything quite 
thoroughly. When in an important question for the trade 
unions--the shifting of the labor jurisdiction from the Social 
Affairs to the Justice Ministry--Scharping gave in to the 
pressure of the FDP [Free Democratic Party] in the coalition 
talks, and the trade unions lamented that they were not asked, 
Scharping answered tersely: "Why should I? After all I knew 
that you are against it." This was a succinct and clear rebuff 
from the lonesome ruler, who can build on an unusually high 
level of authority. Scharping's squad of ministers has always 
remained loyal to "godfather." As soon as someone departs even a 
little from the prescribed course, he is caught and brought back 
into line. 
  Juergen Zoellner, his friend and science minister, has 
observed a typical work characteristic of Scharping: 
  No one can deny his steadfastness and ability to get things 
done. "In many situations, he gives the impression of being 
single-minded, of concentrating only on a very specific area or 
object, but he thereby takes in all of the surrounding 
circumstances. At these times, his interests and focal points 
often appear unorderly, but then his strategic thinking suddenly 
reveals itself in the end." 
  The pattern of his work techniques cannot be recognized 
"until it is done." "When it is past," Zoellner repeats this 
somewhat mysterious-sounding concept. But the science minister 
assures that "there is no conceited striving by Scharping to 
prove himself in the competence issue." 
  Scharping stresses his competence only when it really seems 
necessary to him. But then--experienced ministers report 
sorrowfully--he can also expose colleagues pitilessly in the 
presence of everyone. 
<H5>  Scharping's Government Office </H5>
  Under Bernhard Vogel, the government office in Mainz was 
more 
of a sedate agency: loyal party soldiers in the ancestral land 
of the CDU [Christian Democratic Union] found a quiet living 
here at the end of their careers. The critical signs of a 
decline of the CDU in the late 1980's and early 1990's were not 
even realized here. 
  Scharping misses no opportunity to praise the loyalty of 
these CDU officials. Almost as a sign of his appreciation, he 
continues to entrust Winfried Scheidt with recording the minutes 
of the cabinet meetings. The chief of Central Department 1, an 
old driver of the CDU, knows all the details about the 
government but keeps his silence. Two other department heads 
likewise still come from the old team. Beyond that, the 
so-called SPIEGEL consultants who look after the individual 
ministries are almost without exception "Vogel people." But, 
just as in other laender affected by changes in the government, 
the important department heads were assigned deputies from the 
SPD, who are supposed to guarantee smooth proceedings in the 
government headquarters. The slogan that comes down from the top 
is this: "Establish loyalties in the control centers and do not 
switch people." That leads only to unrest. 
  Dr. Karl-Heinz Klaer, chief of the government office, has 
accomplished his administrative masterpiece with the 
reorganization of Department 4. 
  Klaer, beginning in 1983 as office manager for Willy Brandt 
and subsequently steeled by "four years of penal company under 
Jochen Vogel," has put together the brain-trust for Rudolf 
Scharping here. Together with the department head, Dr. Gerd 
Mielke, an effective team was assembled within two years, one of 
the largest policy departments in the realm of the ministerial 
bureaucracies in the laender. The formula for success: very 
diverse talents from almost all disciplines work hand in hand. 
Also included are two new consultants, who know how the party 
functions internally. Dr. Rainer Frank, formerly deputy business 
manager for the Social Democratic Working Team for Municipal 
Policy (SGK), and Peter Gruessner, consultant for Bundeswehr 
questions in the barracks, know the mainstream of the SPD and 
feed their experiences into Scharping's land politics. Their 
greatest soft spot is for professionally prepared and 
intelligently staged trips of the minister-president to the 
districts. 
  Karl-Heinz Klaer, a cheerful sort from Saar-Rhine, is a 
constant headhunter, Wherever he encounters people whom he 
considers capable in some area, he collects their calling cards. 
So far he has been fortunate in selecting the staff members, 
probably also because he does not let himself be put under the 
pressure of time. Scharping and Klaer are 100-percent adapted to 
each other and can always be reached by each other. The chief of 
the government office manages in the background, keeps a line of 
retreat open for Rudolf Scharping, organizes the circle of state 
secretaries on Monday afternoons, and clears up possible 
conflicts in advance that could possibly disrupt the cabinet on 
Tuesday. To be sure, he pursues his hobby of media politics but 
otherwise avoids the public quite consciously. Klaer "makes 
relatively few outside appointments, reads everything quite 
carefully, does an unbelievable amount of talking with various 
contacts, and takes charge of the communication in the house, 
which is often missing in the immediate surroundings of 
Scharping," according to the internal view. 
  Klaer, who loves detailed and precise notes in his black A5 
"Cri-Cri" books with a red back, enjoys professional respect and 
sympathy: "He never has anyone on his heels," report those 
working for him, who emphasize his team capability and 
single-mindedness. 
  Several of his close staff members sometimes come to lunch 
in 
the office and always convene once a week. Above all, 
appointments are coordinated in the weekly working meetings. 
Besides Klaer and his adviser Martin Stadelmaier (former 
barracks), the minister-president meets together with office 
manager Friedhelm Wollner (likewise Scharping's schoolmate and 
former colleague of Dietrich Sperling), head secretary 
Marie-Luise Fricker (formerly a secretary in the SPD 
parliamentary group), and Heike Raab. Scharping's secretary, a 
former staff member of Ralf Walter, a young member of the 
Bundestag from Rhineland-Palatinate, is truly the "personal" one 
in the team. She is the practical one in the background, 
organizes the correspondence, writes texts, and schedules 
appointments. She thereby maintains an overall view even in 
hectic situations. 
  Scharping's extraordinary capability is based not least on 
the effective help of his staff members. Because Scharping works 
16 hours a day, "one cannot expect more commitment from Rudolf," 
say without qualification all those who work closely with him. 
  Karl-Heinz Klaer, who loves the work in the system, is 
extremely loyal. Both of them, the minister-president and the 
chief of the government office, "tick the same." There is no 
place for frictional losses and no need for kitchen cabinets. 
Klaer fulfills a critical condition to be allowed to work for 
Rudolf Scharping: they have known each other for years. They sat 
together in sociology seminars in Bonn. The present office 
manager Friedhelm Wollner, a very close confidant of Scharping, 
was also with them. 
  Rudolf Scharping had first arranged a job for the man from 
Saarland in 1971 as a reader with Luchterhand. For this he 
utilized his contacts in the aspiring circles of young social 
democrats [Jusos]. The contact became closer when Klaer--lured 
away from the University of Kassel--worked at the SPD 
headquarters beginning in 1983. As early as 1986, Klaer was of 
the opinion that Scharping ought to join the party executive 
board with the support of Willy Brandt but Rudolf Scharping was 
not yet willing to compete against Willi Rothley, one of his 
adversaries within the party and currently a deputy in the 
European Parliament. He was thereby giving himself more time. 
When Klaer took over the important "politics" department in the 
barracks in 1987, he remembered his friend and procured 
"something very nice for Rhineland-Palatinate" in party 
projects. The Saar-Palatinate axis was finally forged in its 
final form during the Berlin party congress in December 1989. 
Many--such as the present office manager Friedhelm Wollner--who 
really work closely with Rudolf Scharping look back on similar 
experiences. Klaer knows the formula: "One must cultivate 
loyalties." Wollner and Klaer are living examples of opposites. 
The one is as busy as a bee routinely managing the daily 
business and sees to it that no mistakes are made--an effective 
gatekeeper, who also takes the initiative in subjects that may 
be important later on. The other basically deals with things in 
the long term and thinks conceptually into the more distant 
future. Scharping gathers around himself the "extremely contrary 
types," can deal well with the conflict configuration, and can 
even make productive use of it. He draws his impulsive strength 
and dynamic force from this tension. 
  Rudolf Scharping grew up as a group politician. He worked 
his 
way up in the SPD of Rhineland-Palatinate as an individual 
combatant with a great deal of perseverance. For this reason, 
his terrain is not primarily the public. It is the party 
committees. This learning experience results in a certain amount 
of resentment against modern forms of political deliberation and 
great speeches and daring concepts drafted on the intellectual 
drawing board. 
  Scharping, who is not yet utilizing the full capacity of his 
staff members, is seen by them as a "diligent, competent, and 
unobtrusive team player," who is "extremely power-conscious," 
however, while thereby always seeking the "rational and 
reasonable decision." In any case, he is "one who can give 
himself time." The minister-president can "kneel into" themes 
and then "draw from a cornucopia of well-processed knowledge." 
The positive assessment of his work style is that he is "no 
martinet" who "takes out his defects on others." 
  It is not an easy matter to advise Scharping, because he 
often knows as much as the advisers themselves. It is even more 
difficult to advise him with respect to his appointment 
calendar, for Scharping tries to deal fairly with all questions. 
But Karl-Heinz Klaer and Friedhelm Wollner have recognized the 
problem and insist that Scharping be spared too many unimportant 
matters. 
  In accordance with his soft spot for groups, Scharping has 
found his own method of political consultation in nonpublic 
circles of experts. At this level of consultation, he 
deliberately organizes intellectual opposition in the debate 
about questions of the future. With respect to the subject of 
"incidental wage costs," for example, he had Professor Walter, 
chief economist of Deutsche Bank, go against the Darmstadt 
economist Bert Ruerup behind closed doors. Ludwig Zachert, chief 
of the BKA [Federal Office of Criminal Investigation], argued 
with the president of the Duesseldorf police about large-scale 
eavesdropping. The deputy Swedish minister for immigration and 
Dieter Oberndoerfer, the liberal-conservative Freiburg political 
scientist, lectured on international streams of immigration. Pro 
and contra positions meet each other in internal conferences on 
"traffic and mobility" or the controversial subject of the 
negative tax/public money. 
  In such circles, where no one "is on stage," Scharping 
always 
follows the same pattern. He brings experts together with the 
important representatives of interests with respect to 
particular subjects and with the ministerial bureaucracy. He 
does not make a big fuss about these meetings but uses them for 
effective internal opinionmaking. Once Scharping, who tends to 
make decisions by himself, has decided on a position, there are 
then just two maxims for action: "decisiveness" and 
"uniformity." This is the "pure pragmatism" that the chancellor 
candidate counts on and swears his staff members to. 
<H5>  Rhineland-Palatinate--Model for Bonn? </H5>
  Scharping has also introduced his Rhineland-Palatinate work 
style in Bonn. In the "barracks," he meets on Mondays in a small 
group with federal business manager Guenther Verheugen; Wolfgang 
Clement, chief of the government office in North 
Rhine-Westphalia; Lafontaine's subordinate Reinhard Klimmt; 
Karl-Heinz Klaer; and, when needed, some department heads in the 
SPD executive board. 
  This circle of his personal advisers preplans the election 
campaign and prestructures the work of the SPD Presidium, for 
what is discussed here is also done. Important discussions are 
moved here first, and to this extent the presidium is 
functionally controlled. 
  When Scharping made Guenter Vergeugen, the former general 
secretary of the FDP, his federal business manager, it was clear 
to him that someone was taking the office who suits him. He is 
no visionary but a professional tradesman, a sober citizen 
rather than a charismatic. Upon taking office, the business 
manager of the SPD, who was also supposed to rise in the 
parliamentary group, wanted to "put the SPD in a position where 
it is worthwhile to take part in the elections." Rudolf 
Scharping could also formulate his self-understanding as a 
"streetcar staff" this way: "In the practice of politics, you 
spend the largest part of your time establishing the 
preconditions that allow you to take political action at all. To 
gain majorities requires the second largest amount of time. The 
time that is then left for you can be used for concepts." 
  The analyst Verheugen praises "the tremendous activity" and 
"unbelievable presence" of Scharping, whose character portrait 
appears different to him than it does to some others: "His real 
qualities are learned only by those who are permitted to work 
with him for a longer time--his self-irony, for example, and his 
tremendously witty, pithy, and funny talent for expressing 
himself, which comes so easily for him." The thing that 
Verheugen most appreciates about his chief, however, is his 
leadership style: "He leads intimately and coordinates closely." 
  Also with the support of Verheugen, who left the SPD 
parliamentary group as parliamentary business manager, Scharping 
was able almost overnight--"with no public spectacle"--to take 
over the "community of independent speakers" [GUS] (Verheugen 
means the SPD parliamentary group). Once again Scharping was 
fortunate. 
  A "power vacuum" had arisen around the rather ineffective 
chairman Hans-Ulrich Klose, which no one was filling. The 
parliamentary group was accustomed, however, "to being led 
strictly. Moreover for the deputies the power in Bonn had never 
been as close as at the time of their (re-) installation in the 
election districts." Scharping took advantage of this 
situation and enthroned himself, with no resistance from Klose, 
the shadow foreign minister, as de facto chairman of the 
parliamentary group. The influence of the party chairman and his 
opportunities to present himself externally were thereby 
expanded and his forces were concentrated. Verheugen loves this 
form of inconspicuous disciplining: the parliamentary group 
"presently perceives the leadership with tight reins as hearty. 
The people sense that self-acquired substance is there." 
  When important appointments are pending in Bonn, Scharping 
spends half the week there, pursues his favorite activities, and 
"carries on talks into the night." With success, for the quiet 
takeover of the parliamentary group was anything but child's 
play. 
  But it is clear to Scharping that the unity cannot last. It 
is no accident that it came to a dispute in the SPD about 
compensation in the question of nursing care insurance, when he 
had to cure a case of the flu at the beginning of March 1994. 
  Conflicts such as this between Rudolf Dressler, the chairman 
of the SPD's Working Association for Employee Questions (AfA), 
who is close to the trade unions, and Oskar Lafontaine, the 
postmodern deregulator, will flare up again and again: in 
pension (cutting) policy, social policy, and, in general, 
finance policy. Scharping's principle of strict limitation of 
expenditures in the event that they take over the government 
collides with greediness in finance policy in the left wing of 
the party. 
<H5>  Profile of Scharping's Program </H5>
  Peculiarities in the biography, learning experiences, 
successes, and failures determine the long-term goals and 
orientations not only of top politicians. The subjective access 
to social-policy formulations of the problem determine the 
program profile of a politician. Hence the theme of political 
scientist Hans Buchheim also applies to Rudolf Scharping: 
  "Ultimately the person orders all the content that he knows 
and all the experiences that he has, not in accordance with 
objective, but rather with personal criteria: in accordance with 
his biography, intentions, concerns, and state of health.... 
Therefore, the overall order of reality present in the 
consciousness of the person is organized not objectively but 
personally." It is also true for Rudolf Scharping that "politics 
is an interaction that serves only to form personal relations, 
namely the definition of the common situation of all members of 
a society.... It is not a matter of what is, but of how what is 
is interpreted." 
  Following this theme, it is illuminating in the 
clarification 
of fundamental positions to measure persons and policies against 
the specific practice rather than against somewhat nebulous 
explanations and nonbinding theoretical papers. 
  A characteristic example of such practice was the strictly 
secret coalition negotiations with the Greens and the FDP in two 
middle-class hotels in Rheingau in the first half of May 1991. 
After initial exploratory talks on 25 April 1991, Scharping, the 
SPD chief, achieved parallel talks with the Greens and the FDP. 
It was a strategically ingenious coup, for until the end he was 
able to leave both partners in the belief that serious 
negotiations were under way with them and the respective other 
party. That produced in both of them a pressure for success that 
could only benefit him and thereby helped him to put through his 
standards for the coalition talks--"a maximum amount of social 
democratic content" and a "maximum amount of dependability," as 
is noted in the confidential minutes of the Greens on the talks. 
  It was thereby clear from the outset for him and the leaders 
of the negotiations for the SPD that the meeting with the Greens 
involved "sham negotiations," as top people in the SPD now admit 
privately. But there are some negotiation leaders of the SPD who 
stubbornly dispute this assessment. They insist that their 
decision situation was open. Scharping negotiated for 70 hours 
with the Greens and produced almost 100 pages of minutes. In the 
end, his list of differences from 14 May 1991 essentially agreed 
with his letter on 29 April, in which he had presented to the 
Greens--in advance--the secret predetermined break points of the 
negotiations in the form of three pages of questions. 
  But at the core it was a matter of the "maximum amount of 
dependability." Parliamentarian Scharping could imagine this 
only with the liberals. The background of the SPD's policy of 
differentiation from the Realo-Greens in Mainz that Scharping 
had practiced even in opposition times was probably that he 
considered the new parliamentary force to be superfluous. His 
statement that "We ourselves are green," is meant quite 
seriously. With the rise of the Greens, which occurred parallel 
to Scharping's political career, the pace of his career was 
first slowed. The habits of most Greens also displease him. He 
also maintains strict distance to Green female politicians such 
as the top-realo Gisela Bill, who possibly could also work in 
the Working Association of Social Democratic Women (AsF), 
because he perceives fundamentalist tendencies in her. Only land 
parliament deputy Manfred Seibel, a printer from Hauenstein near 
Pirmasens, is accepted by the Social Democrats, although he 
frequently represents strongly leftist positions. But in his 
"bourgeois" bearing and in his work style--he likes to read 
files and like Scharping is sometimes brilliant with details--he 
corresponds to the established parliamentary habits of the SPD. 
  In an internal and still unpublished memorandum, the Greens 
have summarized common opposition experiences, the intensive 
coalition negotiations, and the results from two years of 
government by the SPD-FDP. The comments therein on Scharping's 
personality profile cast a glaring green light on the SPD 
politician, who comes from the same generation as the Green 
politicians in the parliamentary group. It is a picture marked 
by lack of understanding and by distance: 
  ``Scharping's stiffness corresponds to his dispassionate way 
of pursuing politics. It is difficult to find deeper convictions 
in him. Accordingly, fundamental statements from him--government 
statements, for example--are colorless and without any vision, 
as boring as the business reports of companies. He very much 
loves the enumeration of specific technical problems and 
possible solutions, as if to demonstrate his competence. The 
derivation of causes and the attempt at a social-policy analysis 
or the corresponding evaluations are not his thing. 
  ``Scharping provides nothing on further reaching problems 
even in Rhineland-Palatinate, such as the development of rural 
areas, the future of agriculture, the distressed viniculture, 
and sick shoe industry, or postal and railroad reform, or he 
just gives prepared ideas from the conservative drawer. When 
Greens present alternative concepts here, one always hear the 
charge of `unrealistic' from Scharping. 
  ``On complex themes such as economic growth as opposed to 
ecology, the exploitation of resources, the problems of carbon 
dioxide, gene technology, unfair world economic order, and 
impoverishment of the Third World, there are no conceptual 
initiatives from Scharping. He either stays with superficial 
phrases, or he prefers to omit such themes entirely. 
  ``Such rather one-dimensional ways of perception qualify 
him, 
on the other hand, to his first nationally observed appearances 
for the SPD when it is a matter of the pragmatic checking off of 
issues with the conservatives--in the compromise on asylum just 
as in the negotiations on the solidarity pact. 
  ``Smug portrayals are highly developed with Scharping. He 
understands the language of rhetoric on problems nearly 
perfectly. Compromises have no reverse side for him. Criticism 
of his politics or person is never justified at all. 
  ``After all of these experiences, it is not very likely that 
Scharping's heart will begin to beat vigorously on the left or 
that he will develop an ecological awareness. 
  ``We must, however, be prepared to see Scharping make some 
surprising leaps in his uncurbed drive for power and that he 
will suddenly take on ecological and social questions. But it is 
more probable that Scharping will seek his chance in the 
cultivation of his conservative image, his `technical 
competence' and his `dependability,' etc.'' 
  Despite this tough criticism, in the final passage one can 
hear what even the Greens admit privately. If the majority 
relations were to point to red-green and not allow any 
alternative government formations, then the chairman of the SPD 
would also work with the Greens for the sake of power. He will 
then use the 70 hours of coalition talks with the Greens in 
Rhineland-Pfalz as a store of experience. 

</TEXT>

</DOC>
