ID: 39	RANK: 82	SCORE: 12.6771

<DOC>
<DOCNO> FBIS4-43924 </DOCNO>
<HT>    "drweu121_h_94010" </HT>


<HEADER>
<AU>   FBIS-WEU-94-121 </AU>
Daily Report 
<DATE1>  22 Jun 1994 </DATE1>

</HEADER>

<F P=100> GERMANY </F>
<H3> <TI>   Scharping: `Time Remains Ripe' for Change </TI></H3>
<HT><F P=107><PHRASE>    Scharping: `Time Remains Ripe' for Change </PHRASE></F></HT>

<F P=102>   AU2206151994 Munich SUEDDEUTSCHE ZEITUNG in German 22 Jun 94 
p 6 </F>

<F P=103> AU2206151994 </F>
<F P=104>  Munich SUEDDEUTSCHE ZEITUNG </F>
<F P=105>  German </F>


<TEXT>
BFN 

<F P=106> [Interview with SPD Chairman Rudolf Scharping by Heribert </F>
Prantl and Martin E. Sueskind; place and date not given: "Kohl? 
The Man Has No Idea of What the Future Is!"] 
  [Text] [SUEDDEUTSCHE ZEITUNG] Mr. Scharping, are you a 
bad loser? 
  [Scharping] No, but I prefer to win. 
  [SUEDDEUTSCHE ZEITUNG] Three months ago you said: "The 
greatest risk to our victory in the Bundestag election is that 
too many people assume the Social Democratic Party [SPD] will 
simply win the next election and lead the next Federal 
Government." This risk no longer exists. What now? 
  [Scharping] I also said that he who is too arrogant will 
have to watch out. After the fine victory in Lower Saxony we 
have sometimes reanimated bad old habits instead of 
concentrating on formulating a reformist policy. I am speaking 
of a policy that benefits the people in Germany and improves 
their living conditions. We have to implement the triad of 
reform in Germany -- fighting unemployment, social justice, and 
protection of the environment and nature. And we must link the 
necessity for reformist policy to the need for security. There 
is a good old statement that is even more true today than at 
many other times: He who wants to live in security tomorrow 
must fight for reform today. 
  [SUEDDEUTSCHE ZEITUNG] Half a year ago the general feeling 
still prevailed -- even in the media -- that the time was ripe 
for a change of power. Yet now the winds have turned.... 
  [Scharping] Time remains ripe for a change in power. Yet, 
those who look at things only from the perspective of the 
election to the European Parliament do not see everything. 
  [SUEDDEUTSCHE ZEITUNG] Have you not noted the change in 
mood, which one can feel so strongly? 
  [Scharping] I have, too, and it is true that a lot has 
changed as far as the mood is concerned. And the cartel for 
preserving the conservative power works and it also involves 
certain media. I never expected Helmut Kohl to relinquish power 
without a fight. This is exactly why I warned against assuming 
we would win automatically. He who wants to enforce his policy 
and gain the necessary power must be determined and concentrate 
his arguments on what is politically essential. We have not 
exactly managed to do that in the past three months. 
  [SUEDDEUTSCHE ZEITUNG] There is something the voters have 
against the SPD. Can you imagine what it is? 
  [Scharping] No, I think that the premise of your question is 
wrong. In the European election we did not manage to mobilize 
the voters. In the Bundestag election this will be completely 
different. I admit that some have become more skeptical about 
whether the SPD really wants the change and whether it can do 
it. However, starting with the party congress in Halle, this 
will be different. 
  [SUEDDEUTSCHE ZEITUNG] Is it a matter of time to emerge from 
the low or does the SPD, does its chairman, its chancellor 
candidate have to think of something very special? 
  [Scharping] People will not put up with the chancellor's 
complacency until 16 October. When I speak of the challenges of 
reformist policy, then I have to point out one thing: The 
Federal Government announces that, contrary to what it had 
promised so far, it will not provide a tax policy concept for 
the remaining years of this decade. As usual, it does not keep 
its promise and, as usual, it refuses to give answers. Just as 
in 1990 it is telling lies again on the tax issue, because it is 
planning to raise taxes after 16 October. Yet in the media this 
is not playing any role at the moment. 
  [SUEDDEUTSCHE ZEITUNG] Does this mean that the media are to 
blame for the current atmosphere and the bad image of the SPD? 
  [Scharping] No. Nevertheless -- and I say this ironically 
-- there are too many people in your trade who have found Kohl 
too hard a nut to crack. One example is all that talk about 
economic recovery. I wish it would come, as does any reasonable 
man. Yet, unfortunately, this does not change the fact that 2.3 
million households are on welfare in our country -- more than 
ever before, that we are short of 5 million jobs -- more than 
ever before, that public debts have reached 2,000 billion -- 
more than ever before -- and that a wave of bankruptcies is 
rolling across the country -- also unprecedented in the postwar 
era. The real situation is, thus, contradictory. It will only 
turn into a recovery for everybody when the slight recovery of 
the economy is made into something more with great 
determination. Politics must formulate hopes but it must not 
play around with those hopes for the purposes of party politics. 
Yet, this is exactly what the Federal Government is doing at the 
moment in an irresponsible way, as it did in 1990. 
  [SUEDDEUTSCHE ZEITUNG] If things were the way you have 
said, then the question still remains whether you, whether the 
SPD has underestimated the chancellor. 
  [Scharping] I have not. Yet, when the SPD or some of its 
members argue about the speed limit, a dispute that was 
absolutely irrelevant, then the SPD's clear objective of a 
policy for ecological reform is thrust into the background. The 
establishment of an energy policy that is compatible with the 
environment, phasing out nuclear energy, the promotion of solar 
technology, preventive ecological work instead of repair -- 
these are the issues that are at the center of our policy. When 
the SPD says that it will put through equal child benefits and 
make sure that the living wage is not taxed -- and, at the same 
time, conducts artificial coalition debates, then these 
artificial things will always get more public attention than 
anything substantial. Or when the SPD says that it will cut 
ancillary wage costs, modernize state activities, and limit 
state debts -- and, at the same time, starts a public debate on 
certain rates -- then this is bound to irritate people. I want 
the SPD to focus on its own policies and the resulting dispute 
with the CDU. 
  [SUEDDEUTSCHE ZEITUNG] Vague voices have spoiled the clear 
course, so to speak. Do you see no reason at all to be 
self-critical? 
  [Scharping] I have certainly also made mistakes, worked too 
much in certain areas, thus losing concentration. This will 
change. 
  [SUEDDEUTSCHE ZEITUNG] Slogans from the sphere of security 
used by the SPD in the European election campaign were 
attributed by listeners in a radio survey to the Republikaner 
and the Christian Social Union [CSU] rather than to the SPD. 
Does this bother you? 
  [Scharping] I have noticed one thing: In 1972, the SPD 
conducted an election campaign for reform and enforcing its 
ostpolitik. One slogan at the time was: "Germans, you can be 
proud of your country." 
  [SUEDDEUTSCHE ZEITUNG] So you have not jumped on the 
bandwagon of nationalism? 
  [Scharping] On the contrary. In any public speech I 
campaign against nationalism and promote an open-minded society 
that is being held together by freedom and social 
responsibility. In connection with internal security I would, 
therefore, like to point out the following: Taking a tough 
position on organized crime is a struggle for freedom and the 
integrity of democratic institutions, which are indispensable 
for a law-governed state. Those who fail to understand that 
should look toward Italy. 
  [SUEDDEUTSCHE ZEITUNG] The SPD helped the government 
coalition to surmount parliamentary hurdles on some substantial 
issues. Has this been worth the trouble for you? 
  [Scharping] The SPD has carried its point, which is 
something completely different to helping the government 
surmount some hurdles. This happened in the case of the pension 
reform and the health reform. On the issue of the nursing-care 
insurance, we achieved a compromise, which, from my point of 
view, was necessary for two reasons: First, to help the people 
affected; and, second, to eliminate the suspicion that the 
politicians have become absolutely unable to make any decision 
at all. As far as the asylum law is concerned, we made a joint 
decision. I wonder what the situation would be like in Germany 
today if things had not been changed. And the suspicion that we 
only shifted the problem to our neighbors, such as the Poles or 
Czechs, was and is wrong, as I could see first hand in both 
these countries. We did not remove any controversial points but 
carried our point, albeit sometimes by moderating our demands. 
  [SUEDDEUTSCHE ZEITUNG] Somebody said that the SPD was 
"flirting" with the coalition government. 
  [Scharping] But then we would have to agree to the 
coalition's anticrime law in the Bundesrat, which we will not. 
The reason that we are not doing it is that this law is 
incomplete in substance and will remain ineffective. Nobody 
must think that DM80-100 billion in "sales" achieved by 
organized crime each year remains hidden somewhere in a sock or 
under some criminal's pillow. All of it is pumped into the 
economic system, building up a power that may ultimately be 
fateful for the economy and for politics. And if the accusation 
were right that we wanted to eliminate the controversial points 
with the coalition, then we would now have to assume a cowardly 
position and agree to everything the coalition wants. Yet, this 
is exactly what we do not want. This applies to many issues, 
particularly the Bonn government's blatant disrespect for the 
social matters of the citizens in eastern Germany. In light of 
the accusation that we are "flirting" with the government, how 
could anyone still understand the other accusation, namely that 
we are obstructing work in the Bundesrat? Both accusations are 
wrong. 
  [SUEDDEUTSCHE ZEITUNG] Your policy vis-a-vis the government 
so far has often been described thus: Rudolf Scharping is a 
power tactician! 
  [Scharping] At the conclusion of the Wiesbaden party 
congress, I referred to major features of my personal conduct 
because I felt very clearly that some persons were deliberately 
spreading that suspicion, I mean the suspicion whereby I am not 
a man who acts according to an internal clock or compass. I 
consider that a denunciation. My participation in the first 
large peace demonstration in 1981 was linked to an attempt to 
throw me out of political office and thus intimidate me. I was 
not impressed by that. Instead, I was frightened that something 
like that could happen. But my attitude has not changed. A 
second example: When work was started on the construction of 
the Nuelheim-Kaerlich nuclear power station in 
Rhineland-Palatinate right at the beginning of the 1970's, the 
entire social democratic sector, not to mention the whole of 
German public opinion, was in favor of nuclear energy. Less than 
50 people spoke out against Muelheim-Kaerlich. I was one of 
them. 
  [SUEDDEUTSCHE ZEITUNG] Why should Helmut Kohl be voted out 
of office? 
  [Scharping] One can answer with a question and a sentence. 
The question is: Does anyone seriously think Germany will reach 
the year 1998 or even 2000 in a better condition with Helmut 
Kohl at the helm? Does anyone seriously think this man has any 
idea about the future? The man has no idea about the future. 
He thinks he can have another attempt. Is that enough? Never! 
  [SUEDDEUTSCHE ZEITUNG] You suspect him of downright egoism? 
  [Scharping] In any case, the kind of egoism that is 
established in society. Social responsibility and a feeling of 
compassion have shrunk under Helmut Kohl's administration. 
Elitism is assessed purely on the basis of one's wallet. 
Anyone who confuses elitism with a high income must include 
Messrs Schneider or Zwick among the elite. I do not do that. 
And anyone who thinks that productivity rises in line with 
income ignores the real producers in this society. Apart from 
the responsible, innovative, and creative enterprises, these 
producers include those who, working in factories, hospitals, 
the police, and other places, see to it that society remains a 
society. We are facing a decisive question: Do we want to 
constitute a society, in which case, to put it in casual terms, 
we must keep the business running by means of a common 
conception of the dignity of the individual, his social rights, 
and mutual social responsibility? Or should society, according 
to Schaeuble's way of thinking, be kept together by means of 
national pathos and nationalist slogans? 
  [SUEDDEUTSCHE ZEITUNG] You have answered the question why, 
and very energetically. The question how is probably even more 
important. What conditions and what kind of party alliance 
should Chancellor Kohl abandon on 16 October? 
  [Scharping] I have never seen a coalition on any ballot 
paper for a Bundestag election. I have only seen parties. 
  [SUEDDEUTSCHE ZEITUNG] In that case do you consider a 
black-green alliance possible after the Bundestag elections? 
  [Scharping] I hear rumors about such a possibility in 
Saxony, but I cannot imagine it on a federal level. The SPD as 
a whole must take greater care that the debate is held with all 
parties, primarily with the CDU/CSU, about the federal 
government's policies. But one must not forget that, for example 
in eastern Germany, the Party of Democratic Socialism [PDS] 
represents a danger to the possibility of pushing through a 
reform policy in Germany. One also cannot forget that the 
Greens are affecting people's acceptance of reform policy with 
their partially irresponsible suggestions, for example the 
avalanche of levies they suggest or the clear nonsense they have 
uttered concerning foreign policy. 
  [SUEDDEUTSCHE ZEITUNG] Then who is to blame for the fact 
that 
the PDS has become so strong and has risen to become the third 
strongest force in the East? 
  [Scharping] The Federal Republic's policies are to blame. 
  [SUEDDEUTSCHE] Are the Greens on the way to becoming a party 
of the people? 
  [Scharping] No. They evidently want to take the FDP's place. 
  [SUEDDEUTSCHE ZEITUNG] Has the political battle with the 
Republikaner already been won? 
  [Scharping] No. It is a good thing that we were able to 
prevent the Republikaner from entering the European Parliament 
at the elections. It is enough that there are neofascists in 
the Italian Government. But one should make no mistake. The 
rightist radical and nationalist part of the Republikaner has 
not been beaten yet. 
  [SUEDDEUTSCHE ZEITUNG] You said recently: We need the 
entire party to be much stronger than over the past three 
months. Be more precise! Has a section of the party left you 
in the lurch? What section was it, which persons? 
  [Scharping] The SPD has developed a greater team spirit than 
one year ago. Lately this team spirit has fluctuated somewhat, 
but after the Halle congress it will be different again, and 
then everything will move forward. 
  [SUEDDEUTSCHE ZEITUNG] But is it wrong to ask whether 
Gerhard Schroeder has been helpful for the chancellor 
candidate's election campaign? 
  [Scharping] He will be helpful. 
  [SUEDDEUTSCHE ZEITUNG] Last weekend, he accused you of 
having a wrong election campaign concept, and he even said you 
would have to get "clearly" more than 40 percent of the votes on 
16 October. Is that helpful? 
  [Scharping] Schroeder did not put it this way. But I see we 
also have problems with public impressions. It remains a clear 
goal -- a policy of reform, which is specifically aimed at 
improving conditions for the people, will only be possible if 
the SPD is at the front. So we want to become the strongest 
party, and there is a considerable potential for reaching this 
goal. 
  [SUEDDEUTSCHE ZEITUNG] Is it true that the SPD is in a deep 
communication crisis? 
  [Scharping] Not within the party itself. But outside the 
party, there are certain barriers. The journalistic cartel in 
the surroundings of Helmut Kohl works relatively well. It is 
unconstitutional for the Federal Press Office to use public 
funds for covertly launching derogatory comments on the SPD 
chancellor candidate. Moreover, the fact that some of the 
information on the government's work is withheld -- a case in 
point is the Federal Government's tax policy concept -- means 
that precisely the same method is being employed as in 1990, in 
other words, the method to withhold the truth and act according 
to the motto: Vote for Kohl first, and collect the money later. 
  [SUEDDEUTSCHE ZEITUNG] In this election campaign, you will 
probably not repeat the mistake of marching at the top alone. 
What will be your team in the Bundestag election campaign? We 
would like to hear names. 
  [Scharping] You will have to wait. 
  [SUEDDEUTSCHE ZEITUNG] How long? 
  [Scharping] Until 31 August at the latest, but presumably 
not as long as that. 
  [SUEDDEUTSCHE ZEITUNG] But will there be a team? 
  [Scharping] First, there will be a suggestion of how a new 
federal government could work in an efficient and modern way. 
This means that the number of ministries will be reduced, and 
the number of state secretaries will be drastically reduced. We 
will thereby demonstrate how public administration can be made 
leaner and more efficient, so that the state does not have to 
impose new taxes or surcharges on the citizens whenever a new 
project is to be implemented. Second, clarity will be created 
on who will be in charge of which ministry in such a federal 
government. 
  [SUEDDEUTSCHE ZEITUNG] If it is not or cannot be you, by 
whom would you want to be governed? 
  [Scharping] Are you honestly expecting an answer to this 
question? 
  [SUEDDEUTSCHE ZEITUNG] By what type of federal chancellor 
would the citizen Rudolf Scharping want to be governed? 
  [Scharping] By a federal chancellor who combines economic 
competence and social responsibility, has a clear idea of the 
future, and knows that Germany can only live in peace with its 
neighbors, if tolerance and living in peace with one's neighbor 
are appreciated to a larger extent again. By a federal 
chancellor who never forgets that people who work their way up 
have an obligation toward those who have not been able to do so. 
And by a chancellor who never forgets that the strong countries 
on the earth must assume an existential obligation for the 
weaker ones and for their development. 
  [SUEDDEUTSCHE ZEITUNG] Why does the public know so little 
about Rudolf Scharping as a private person? This is at least 
our impression. 
  [Scharping] Because preserving the private sphere requires 
us not to agree to every deprivatization, and because 
demonstrating publicly what is on one's mind ultimately leads to 
equating policy with lifestyle. The substance of policy is not 
determined by the way you dress or spend your vacation. 
  [SUEDDEUTSCHE ZEITUNG] When did you really feel at ease in 
the last 12 months since you were elected party chairman? 
  [Scharping] Repeatedly. I have had many wonderful 
experiences in this time. One of them, which is to do with 
politics, was the great initiative of pupils under the motto 
"Pupils Help Others Live" for the benefit of refugee children in 
the former Yugoslavia. There are also wonderful private 
experiences. I have seen children who are self-confident and 
show regard for others. Such self-confidence includes respect 
for self-confidence, which means rejection of the 
commercialization of children. 
  [SUEDDEUTSCHE ZEITUNG] Are you a religious man? 
  [Scharping] I am a Christian. 
  [SUEDDEUTSCHE ZEITUNG] What does this mean to you as a 
politician? Is being a Christian a private matter, or is it 
more? 
  [Scharping] I think it is more. If you have a certain inner 
attitude, it will also influence the way you act in public. 
Those who out of private conviction or faith speak about 
charity should act accordingly in political life. Let me 
illustrate this by an example. I said some time ago that it 
would not be bad if the salaries of the members of the Federal 
Government were frozen for some time. I earned gloating remarks 
because the Rhineland-Palatinate Government is bound by the 
Civil Service Remuneration Act, just as every civil servant is, 
including those who work only on a temporary basis. I found it 
extremely unpleasant to publicly demonstrate my private 
attitude. Since I have been a member of parliament -- in this 
particular case, of the Rhineland-Palatinate Landtag -- I have 
always told myself that now I am in a relatively good position, 
should think about my own career, and help those who have to 
finance university studies, bridge unemployment, or must 
overcome some other difficulty. I have done so since 1975, 
without publicly talking about it. I made available my salary 
increases as minister-president for charitable purposes. 
However, it embarrasses me to publicly demonstrate my private 
behavior, in order to be able at all to act credibly as a 
politician. I consider it much more important that the 
political parties that call themselves Christian have largely 
given up the social contract, which is based on charity and 
solidarity. 
  [SUEDDEUTSCHE ZEITUNG] Does a politician who is a Christian 
have to advocate retaining the church tax? 
  [Scharping] He does not have to, but he may. 
  [SUEDDEUTSCHE ZEITUNG] Should the church-state relationship 
in our country be maintained in the current form and 
characteristics? 
  [Scharping] Not in every respect, but basically, it should. 
  [SUEDDEUTSCHE ZEITUNG] One of the bases is church tax. 
  [Scharping] I would not consider this a basis, but a 
characteristic -- however, one that makes sense. 
  [SUEDDEUTSCHE ZEITUNG] Are there any personages, possibly 
examples, that have coined or impressed you, from whom you are 
trying to learn? 
  [Scharping] The first figures in whom I was politically 
interested were John F. Kennedy, Willy Brandt, and Martin Luther 
King. I have gradually come to orient myself at 
characteristics, not individual persons alone. However, I still 
hold the view that -- to mention two social democrats -- the 
vision and steadfastness of Willy Brandt and the clarity and 
efficiency of Helmut Schmidt are exemplary characteristics. 
  [SUEDDEUTSCHE ZEITUNG] Has there ever been a point in your 
political life at which you considered giving up this job? 
  [Scharping] Yes. 
  [SUEDDEUTSCHE ZEITUNG] What was that? 
  [Scharping] Being aware of the high risk of being defeated 
in the 1987 landtag elections and the possible consequences, I 
had made arrangements to promptly resign from politics, if 
necessary. Independence is important to me. 
  [SUEDDEUTSCHE ZEITUNG] Can we draw conclusions from this for 
the Bundestag elections on 16 October? 
  [Scharping] No, we will win the Bundestag elections. Nor 
would anyone take over a task such as that of party chairman for 
fun, even less so if there were the prospect of having to give 
it up after two years. In this respect, you need a firm, inner 
conviction and the ability to go through difficult times and 
conflicts. 
  [SUEDDEUTSCHE ZEITUNG] One does not take it over for fun. 
Is it fun, nevertheless? 
  [Scharping] On the whole, it is. I like this task, and I am 
doing it with great inner commitment. Otherwise, I would be 
unable to hold such an office. 

</TEXT>

</DOC>
