ID: 85	RANK: 32	SCORE: 5.1123

<DOC>
<DOCNO> FBIS4-45105 </DOCNO>
<HT>    "jpnea034___94054" </HT>


<HEADER>
<AU>   JPRS-NEA-94-034 </AU>
JPRS 
Near East &amp; South Asia 

</HEADER>

<ABS> </ABS>
<DATE1>     17 May 1994 </DATE1>
<F P=100> SOUTH ASIA </F>
<F P=101> PAKISTAN </F>
<H3> <TI>   U.S. Position on Kashmir Seen Unfavorable, Biased </TI></H3>
<HT><F P=107><PHRASE>    U.S. Position on Kashmir Seen Unfavorable, Biased </PHRASE></F></HT>

<F P=102>   94AS00297B Karachi JANG in Urdu 17 May 94 p 3 </F>
<F P=103> 94AS00297B </F>
<F P=104>  Karachi JANG </F>
<F P=105>  Urdu </F>


<TEXT>
CSO 

<F P=106> [Article by Nair Zaidi: "Do Not Expect Fairness From the </F>
United States Over Kashmir" 
  [Text] Why are Pakistani or Kashmiri leaders living in the 
United States insisting the United States play an active role in 
resolving the Kashmir issue? This question came to my mind 
repeatedly last week. There are a lot of activities taking place 
because India's Prime Minister Narasimha Rao is visiting 
Washington on 18 May. The federation of Pakistani and Islamic 
organizations, known as the Pakistan-American Congress, held a 
large meeting in Washington on 12 May. There was a dinner to 
introduce Professor William Baker's book, KASHMIR VALLEY, VALLEY 
OF DEATH. The professor had risked his life to collect material 
for this book by visiting Srinagar. The Pakistan-American 
Congress spent lot of resources and time in printing and 
publication of this book. We cannot praise the organizations 
president, Dr. Sakhawat Hussain, and the organizer of the 
Washington ceremony, Dr. Murtaza Arain, for their efforts 
enough. Several members of this group addressed the dinner 
meeting. Sardar Abdul Qayum, president of Azad Jammu and 
Kashmir, also made a speech. 
  Dr. Maliha Lodhi, the Pakistani ambassador, addressed the 
meeting during the day. I was busy with some other important 
activity of the Congress at that time, however, I did manage to 
get a copy of the text of the speech. The ambassador presented a 
balanced view of Pakistan-United States relations. Her speech 
did not include mere promises of green pastures or scenarios 
that scare people. Dr. Maliha Lodhi also presented the unfair 
U.S. position on F-16s and our nuclear program without mincing 
any words. She also made it clear that although Pakistan wanted 
to cooperate with the United States, this cooperation will 
depend on Pakistan's own national interests. She also said that 
if the United Nations or the United States want peace in the 
sub-continent, the Kashmir issue must be resolved. Dr. Lodhi has 
been in Washington only for four months. During this brief 
period she had to visit Pakistan twice for official business, 
take care of Sardar Qayum's visit, Narasimha Rao's visit, and 
President Farooq Leghari's visit. Still, she did not have a 
heart attack and this shows her strong personality. 
  I did not know her personally despite her journalist 
background, and met her after her only arrival here. She has a 
strong grasp on Pakistan-United States relations and 
international affairs. This is not because she was a journalist 
(we have many "pedestrians" in our ranks), but because of her 
personal analyses. I will discuss in a separate column how the 
enemies of Pakistan are disturbed even after her brief stay 
here. This issue will require a lot of details. Her address to 
the Pakistan-United States Congress was a first solid speech 
made to any Pakistani community. It gave glimpses of cautious 
optimism, but also warned that Pakistan was not in any position 
to continue taking steps unilaterally. There was another meeting 
of the organization after this speech and I participated briefly 
in that. What I heard during that meeting brings us to the 
subject of discussion today. The participants were clear that 
the United States, despite its statements, was practicing double 
standards in regard to India and Pakistan. The question was how 
to change the U.S. attitude. Since I was only an observer in 
this forum, I thought that it would be appropriate to express my 
opinion in my own way--this column. I will focus on the Kashmir 
issue at this point. The United States and other Western powers 
will never help Pakistan over Kashmir or the Kashmiris that want 
their state to join Pakistan. The UN Security Council 
resolutions that provided Kashmiris the right to 
self-determination were passed in 1948-49. The forces behind 
these resolutions were Great Britain and the United States. 
Everyone knows that Kashmir should go to Pakistan. Great 
Britain, its Viceroy Lord Mountbatten, and the leader of the 
border commission, Lord Radcliffe, committed deceit and gave 
Gurdaspur to India and opened a land route for the Indian army 
to reach Kashmir. History shows that the Indian military did not 
have fighter planes to send troops to Kashmir. Thus, India used 
planes owned by American companies. It is obvious that these 
American companies must have discussed this with the U.S. 
embassy before cooperating in a war effort. Meanwhile when 
Quaid-i Azam tried to use Pakistani military and air force, the 
British general refused to obey Quaid-i Azam. It should be 
remembered that the same British general was commanding both 
armed forces. Thus, India not only got the privilege of using 
the Indian military and air force openly, but also used American 
civilian aircraft. Lord Mountbatten was India's governor general 
at that time. The strategy that was used in the United States to 
stop the war must have been discussed between the governor 
general and Prime Minister Nehru before agreeing on all these 
tricks. World War II, in which the United States and Great 
Britain were allies, had just ended. The United States had 
become the new superpower in the world. The security policy in 
the Middle East and South Asia, known as East of Suez at that 
time, was managed by Great Britain at that time. It is, 
therefore, assumed that the U.S. policy on the sub-continent for 
any UN resolution was formed after discussions with Great 
Britain. This policy was not based on principles of fairness, 
but to protect the Western interests. This made the country 
established in the name of Islam economically paralyzed and 
Kashmir was given to the Hindus. It should also be remembered 
that the Ottoman Empire had fallen 25 years earlier, and the 
West was able to establish its control in the Middle East after 
the fall of this Muslim empire. 
  Is it possible for us to accept that the Great Britain that 
had dishonestly given Kashmir to India in 1948 would sincerely 
support such resolutions in 1948 that would result in annexation 
of Kashmir to Pakistan? The UN resolutions were only a timely 
strategy. Anyhow, the Pakistani leadership of that time had 
limited military options and accepted this resolution. However, 
as expected, neither did India follow up on it nor did the 
United States and Great Britain press India about it. 
  In 1962, when India's whole military force was occupied 
against China and it could not defend Kashmir, President Kennedy 
wrote to President Ayub Khan not to take any military action 
there. In exchange, the United States was to help Pakistan 
negotiate with India. Agreeing for negotiations at a time when 
we could have taken over Kashmir was a major blunder which only 
the Pakistani leadership could make. The talks were held as 
promised and India continuously repeated that Kashmir is its 
integral part. The United States betrayed Pakistan a second 
time. However, the situations in 1962 and 1965 were very 
different. There was no local movement in Kashmir that could 
endanger the Indian government. There were some wolves in "lion" 
clothes in Kashmir that wanted to strengthen their position by 
selling out the Kashmiri people. 
  The situation, however, changed between 1987 and 1989. A 
pure 
local movement in Kashmir was born and men, women, and children 
of Kashmir were ready to sacrifice their lives, souls, and 
property. They have made unprecedented sacrifices. However, when 
this movement reached its apex in 1989-90, a group surfaced that 
began to demand that the United States should play a role in 
resolving the Kashmir issue. Seeing how the United States has 
played no role in the whole history of the Kashmir dispute, this 
demand is ridiculous. A lobby was formed here and the Kashmiri 
American Council hired a lobbying firm for $500,000 per year. 
Its purpose was to persuade the government and the U.S. Congress 
to put pressure on India over Kashmir and take notice of human 
rights violations in Kashmir. This whole lobby effort should 
have been focused on one thing: the United States should be 
non-aligned in this dispute and not put any kind of pressure on 
Pakistan to stop helping Kashmiri freedom fighters. However, 
after this lobbying firm was hired, the Kashmiri freedom 
fighters were called terrorists and Pakistan was accused of 
encouraging terrorism. The Pakistani strategy should have been 
simple. It should have provided full support to the Kashmiri 
freedom fighters and prepared itself to withstand the U.S. 
pressure for a short period. Had it warded off this pressure 
until 1993, the Kashmiri movement would have made remarkable 
progress. 
  Those who are sincerely demanding U.S. involvement in 
Kashmir 
are naive. Why should the United States and other Western powers 
help "resolve" an issue that could end the differences between 
India and Pakistan? Their goal is to keep us divided and not 
unite us. have these powers even given a fair treatment to any 
international issue until now? 
  The lobby firms working for Pakistan and Kashmir should have 
the strategy aimed at keeping the United States out of Kashmir 
and let the freedom struggle achieve its goal. No slave nation 
in the world has managed to get the gift of freedom from 
negotiation tables. If this movement is suspended now, there 
will no such movement again for a hundred years. Kashmir will 
become an international brothel if it comes under the 
trusteeship of the United Nations and Western powers. Now only 
will chastity be violated, it will then be sold. The people who 
are trying to "solve" the Kashmir issue with the U.S. help will 
be responsible for that! 

</TEXT>

</DOC>
