ID: 85	RANK: 53	SCORE: 4.6656

<DOC>
<DOCNO> FBIS4-45104 </DOCNO>
<HT>    "jpnea034___94053" </HT>


<HEADER>
<AU>   JPRS-NEA-94-034 </AU>
JPRS 
Near East &amp; South Asia 

</HEADER>

<ABS> </ABS>
<DATE1>     16 May 1994 </DATE1>
<F P=100> SOUTH ASIA </F>
<F P=101> PAKISTAN </F>
<H3> <TI>   Attempts To Improve Relations With U.S. Seen Futile </TI></H3>
<HT><F P=107><PHRASE>    Attempts To Improve Relations With U.S. Seen Futile </PHRASE></F></HT>

<F P=102>   94AS0297A Karachi JANG in Urdu 16 May 94 p 3 </F>
<F P=103> 94AS0297A </F>
<F P=104>  Karachi JANG </F>
<F P=105>  Urdu </F>


<TEXT>
CSO 

<F P=106> [Editorial: "Pakistan-U.S. Relations--Vain Delusion"] </F>
  [Text] No two countries in the world maintain similar 
relations all the time; these change as the result of different 
situations and events. Pakistan-U.S. relations are no exception 
to this rule. The relations between the United States and 
Pakistan have seen many ups and downs during the last 45 years. 
There have been periods of close and warm relations as well as 
of coolness. Various conditions are affecting the 
Pakistan-United States relations at present and we see changes. 
We have commented on President Clinton's report sent to the U.S. 
Congress the other day. He had made two surprising statements in 
that report: (1) Pakistan is blackmailing India over the Kashmir 
issue and is saying that if the Kashmir issue is not resolved a 
nuclear war will break out between the two countries. In Mr. 
Clinton's opinion this is equivalent to Pakistan trying to 
blackmail India. (2) The U.S. President also has said that the 
situation will remain dangerous and peace cannot be established 
in South Asia until the Kashmir issue is resolved. 
  President Clinton's sentiments have not only surprised but 
also worried the people of Pakistan. They have been forced to 
wonder why did this change in the U.S. stand occur so suddenly. 
Only yesterday, a ranked U.S. official, Robin Raphel, had said 
emphatically that the United States considered Jammu-Kashmir a 
disputed region and a decision needed to be made about its 
future. In addition to Robin Raphel, other U.S. spokespersons 
had expressed the same opinion. It appears that when India 
reacted strongly to this statement and used various tactics to 
pressure Ms. Robin [Raphel] and the United States, the United 
States was forced to change its stand. Recently, India and the 
United States held secret talks in London to discuss India's 
nuclear program. These talks were unsuccessful and India refused 
to make any agreement with the United States about its nuclear 
program. Its important officials have announced that India will 
continue with its missiles program as scheduled and will 
complete all tests by this coming July. These events indicate 
that India is not willing to listen to the United States. The 
Indian prime minister is visiting the United States these days. 
The Indian government and news media have used various tactics 
to pressure the U.S. government. They are trying to achieve all 
Indian goals during Mr. Narasimha Rao's visit to the United 
States and not to accept U.S. advice or pressure on any issue. 
Against this background, it is not easy to believe the 
statements made by two important Pakistani leaders today. One is 
forced to ask if these expressions are the result of some 
misconception or were made to make Pakistani people optimistic 
without any basis. The Pakistani ambassador to the United States 
said, "The relations between Pakistan and the United States have 
improved amazingly. The United States that was ready to declare 
Pakistan a terrorist nation until yesterday has adopted a very 
amiable attitude toward us. The United States says that if 
Pakistan assures it of freezing its nuclear program, it is ready 
to nullify the Pressler amendment." Similarly, Foreign Minister 
Sardar Asif Ahmed Ali said that Pakistan and the United States 
have agreed to make South Asia a nuclear-free zone. The United 
States will treat India and Pakistan equally on this issue. Mr. 
Asif Ali also claimed that the United States has admitted to the 
Pressler amendment being "a bad law and a very bad policy." We 
are entering a new era in which both Pakistan and the United 
states have agreed to improve and strengthen their mutual 
relations. He also said that the Pakistani stand over Kashmir 
and the nuclear program is better understood in the United 
States now after the recent diplomatic efforts by the government 
of Pakistan. Mr. Asif Ali also claimed that the United States 
has begun to feel that the Kashmir issue is a permanent danger 
to peace in South Asia. These opinions expressed by Dr. Maliha 
Lodhi and Sardar Asif Ali are very encouraging provided they 
represent the situation accurately. This, however, is not easy 
to understand in the light of President Clinton's report 
mentioned earlier. The foreign minister said that the United 
States has declared the Pressler amendment a bad law and a very 
bad policy. It could be really true, but we have not seen any 
proof of it. If the U.S. viewpoint has really changed, why did 
not it reinstate its aid to us? Why did not it decide to supply 
the 38 F-16s we have already paid for? Similarly, if the United 
States has decided not to require us to roll back our nuclear 
program unilaterally and also understands our positions, then 
what reason does it have to keep the Pressler amendment? The 
United States knows that India has refused to compromise its 
nuclear program. Therefore, if it wants to treat both countries 
equally, it should refrain from punishing Pakistan for keeping 
its nuclear program. However, we notice that this did not 
happen. The United States, in order to temporarily suspend the 
Pressler amendment, is asking us to open up our nuclear 
installations for inspection as a price for it. Does it show 
that it is treating India and Pakistan equally? There is no 
doubt that Ms. Bhutto's government is trying to make the United 
states understand its position and has succeeded in it to an 
extent. However, it is not appropriate to make the situation 
look so positive that it does not represent the facts. We hope 
and pray that all blocks in the path of Pakistan-United States 
relations are removed. At the same time, we should not express 
extraordinary optimism and should wait for the results of 
Narasimha Rao and President Leghari's visits to the United 
States. Only then will a clear picture will emerge. 

</TEXT>

</DOC>
