ID: 48	RANK: 86	SCORE: 6.5308

<DOC>
<DOCNO> FBIS4-43432 </DOCNO>
<HT>    "drweu117_e_94003" </HT>


<HEADER>
<AU>   FBIS-WEU-94-117 </AU>
Daily Report 
<DATE1>  28 May 1994 </DATE1>

</HEADER>

<F P=100> UNITED KINGDOM </F>
<H3> <TI>   Director Francovich Comments on Lockerbie Film </TI></H3>
<HT><F P=107><PHRASE>    Director Francovich Comments on Lockerbie Film </PHRASE></F></HT>

<F P=102>   BR1606130394 Milan PANORAMA in Italian 28 May 94 pp 103-105 </F>
<F P=103> BR1606130394 </F>
<F P=104>  Milan PANORAMA </F>
<F P=105>  Italian </F>


<TEXT>
BFN 

<F P=106> [Report on interview with U.S. movie director Allan </F>
Francovich by Giovanni Porta in London; date not given: 
"Explosive Scenario"] 
  [Text] The skies over Lockerbie, Scotland, 21 December 
1988: A bomb hidden in the baggage compartment of the Pan Am 
Boeing 747 en route from London to New York explodes, destroying 
the aircraft. In the disaster 259 passengers and crew members 
lost their lives and 11 Scottish citizens were killed by the 
flaming wreckage. In 1990, after lengthy investigations, the 
Governments of Britain and the United States formally accused 
two Libyan agents of organizing the attack. The Libyan trail is 
still considered today as the only valid one supported by proof. 
Colonel Mu'ammar al-Qadhdhafi's government, isolated by the 
international community's condemnation and subjected to an 
economic embargo by the United Nations, has always tried to 
prove its innocence. It does not appear to have succeeded in 
the attempt, despite millions of dollars spent on propaganda 
initiatives. 
  Today, a new initiative which can be traced back to the 
authorities in Tripoli proposes a disconcerting version of the 
events, which has already sparked a fiery controversy and looks 
set to unhinge many certainties. 
  The rendezvous was in a small Italian cafe in Soho, London, 
against a backdrop of blue-movie cinemas and small antique 
shops. Allan Francovich, an Italian-Croatian-American producer 
and director specializing in controversial investigative fims on 
the dark world of secret services -- "A Company Business," on 
the mysteries of the CIA; the TV series on Gladio, NATO's secret 
organization, broadcast by the BBC, which caused a huge stir -- 
chose this anonymous venue for the interview since it was safe 
from prying eyes and ears. For some weeks he has felt that he 
is in danger: The phones in the headquarters of Hemar 
Enterprises Inc., his production company, appear to have been 
bugged "by the British secret services"; the director's whole 
team of operators, analysts, and research people is apparently 
being followed by plain-clothes agents; he himself claims to 
have received death threats. 
  Allan Francovich's secret is sealed in a video cassette 
containing a new "startling" TV documentary on the Lockerbie 
disaster, with the vaguely literary title of "The Maltese Double 
Cross." This is a tape which nobody has yet seen -- "It will be 
ready in five weeks' time" -- but which is already at the center 
of a raging controversy in Britain and the United States: The 
government in London is threatening to ban distribution; the 
British TV Channel 4, which intended to broadcast the 
investigation, has unexpectedly severed all contacts with 
Francovich; the U.S. judicial authorities are on the trail of 
two of the director's closest staff, in hiding in West Europe; 
the families of the 270 people who died in the disaster are 
quarreling openly, split between supporters -- led by Briton Jim 
Swire, a relation of one of the victims -- and opponents -- 
lawyer Lee Kreindler, defending the interests of the U.S. 
families -- of the film. 
  The controversy exploded in November 1993 following a 
FINANCIAL TIMES report on the origin of the 633,000 pounds (some 
1.5 billion lire) allocated for the making of the film. It 
transpired that Hemar, a company set up on the British Virgin 
Isles solely for this purpose, was backed by a consortium with 
Libyan connections: the conglomerate Lonrho, controlled by the 
controversial finance mogul "Tiny" Rowland, and LAFICO, the 
Tripoli government's powerful holding company. 
  Allan Francovich did not want to reveal the "plot" of his 
film, "a preview screening of which will be shown to the 
relations of the British victims." But in the course of our 
conversation, he ended up by divulging the trails he followed in 
his investigations. The main sources he used for his 
"fieldwork" were: "The Trail of the Octopus," a book by Lester 
Coleman, a former U.S. Defense Intelligence Agency [DIA] agent, 
who is interviewed at length in the film; a 27-page confidential 
report (which PANORAMA was able to view) commissioned by Pan Am 
from a private investigation agency, Interfor Inc., owned by 
Juval Aviv, an Israeli citizen; "first-hand" information 
provided by Oswald Le Winter (alias Ibrahim Razin, alias 
Professor Sermit), a shady character convicted for false witness 
in the United States and a former international drug smuggler 
"on behalf of the CIA and Colonel Oliver North"; and 
confidential information "obtained by our contacts in the secret 
services of various Arab countries and West and East Europe." 
<H5>  300 Gms of Semtex </H5>
  The complicated version which "The Maltese Double Cross" 
would have us believe goes something like this: The bomb which 
destroyed the Pan Am Boeing on 21 December 1988 was not shipped 
from Malta, via Frankfurt, by Libyan agents Lamine Khalifah 
Fahimah and 'Abd-al Basit 'Ali al-Miqrahi: The evidence 
gathered on the island against the two was apparently 
"skillfully fabricated." The device is said to have been 
identical to those hidden in certain tape recorders and 
electronic apparatus discovered by the German police in a base 
belonging to the PPLF-GC (Palestine Popular Liberation 
Front--General Command) in Duesseldorf on 26 October 1988. The 
bomb -- 300 gms of Semtex explosive with a timer manufactured by 
a firm called Mebo AG in Zurich -- was apparently placed inside 
a Toshiba tape recorder hidden inside an unaccompanied suitcase 
shipped from Frankfurt. The timer, an MST-13 manufactured by 
Swiss expert Edwin Bollier, may have been made available to the 
PPLF-GC by the East German security service Stasi, a theory put 
forward in a recent article in the weekly DER SPIEGEL. The 
suitcase was apparently part of one of the "controlled drug 
shipments" customarily organized by the CIA and the DIA between 
the Middle East and the United States in support of their own 
fifth columns in the Arab world and terrorist circles. The 
extremist Palestinian grouping led by Ahmad Jibril, with Syrian 
connections, appears to have discovered the existence of this 
traffic (tolerated by the German authorities, which did not 
subject the drug suitcases to the usual checks) and to have 
taken advantage of this knowledge to place the bomb; the action 
was apparently carried out, with Syria's assent, to the order of 
the government in Tehran in retaliation for the downing of an 
Iranian Airbus in the Persian Gulf by the U.S. frigate Vincennes 
on 3 July 1988. 
  Before the attack -- according to Francovich and his team -- 
the U.S. secret services received "at least 16 danger warnings, 
some of which were extremely detailed," from Israel's Mosad and 
another anonymous source. Nobody did anything to stop the Pan 
Am aircraft or to warn the passengers -- or at least the 
"ordinary" passengers: In fact, a number of important South 
African politicians were due to board flight PA 103 on 21 
December, "but they were obviously warned because they canceled 
their reservations at the last minute." 
  "The CIA's men were in Lockerbie a mere two hours after the 
disaster, frantically searching the wreckage," Francovich 
explained. "They were coordinated by Vincent Cannistraro, a 
well-known expert in disinformation operations and one of the 
originators of the plan to eliminate al-Qadhdhafi." Cannistraro 
"is still today at the head of the CIA team entrusted with the 
investigations, and he is one of the leading supporters of the 
Libyan trail." 
<H5>  New Backers </H5>
  Today, following the press leaks on the film's backers, 
Lonrho and its partners have apparently withdrawn their support 
and sold Hemar, along with the film rights. "I have been 
contacted by new backers," Francovich said, "bankers, men who 
have worked with Armand Hammer and Bernie Cornfeld and who want 
to take over. Director Oliver Stone is interested in producing 
the documentary." 
  "Our enemies," the director continued, "are afraid of the 
terrible truths which we have discovered and can prove." "The 
Libyan trail is certainly the most convenient and the easiest to 
get international public opinion to swallow," the director 
explained, "but we want to know why, in all these years, the 
governments which want to bring the two Libyan citizens to trial 
have never published the evidence they claim to have against 
them. No serious investigation has ever been conducted into the 
Lockerbie disaster. For the first time, our investigation 
reconstructs the events which led up to the Jumbo's explosion; 
it sheds light on the key characters involved in the attack, and 
on the men from the CIA, the DIA, and the German and Middle East 
secret services who have taken part in directing the scent 
against the Libyans." 
  If "The Maltese Double Cross" ever gets shown to the public, 
it certainly will not quench the desire for justice in the 270 
victim's relations. 

</TEXT>

</DOC>
