ID: 46	RANK: 70	SCORE: 16.5173

<DOC>
<DOCNO> FBIS4-66192 </DOCNO>
<HT>    "jpcar030___94001" </HT>


<HEADER>
<AU>   JPRS-CAR-94-030 </AU>
JPRS 
China 

<DATE1>  13 January 1994 </DATE1>

</HEADER>

<F P=100> INTERNATIONAL </F>
<F P=101> GENERAL </F>
<H3> <TI>   Nuclear Test Ban Treaty Prospects Explored </TI></H3>
<HT><F P=107><PHRASE>    Nuclear Test Ban Treaty Prospects Explored </PHRASE></F></HT>

<F P=102>   94CM0228A Beijing GUOJI WENTI YANJIU [INTERNATIONAL STUDIES] 
in Chinese No 51, 13 Jan 94 pp 5-12 </F>

<F P=103> 94CM0228A </F>
<F P=104>  Beijing GUOJI WENTI YANJIU [INTERNATIONAL STUDIES] 
in Chinese No 51, 13 Jan 94 pp 5-12 </F>

<F P=105> Chinese </F>


<TEXT>
CSO 

<F P=106> [Article by Zou Yunhua (6760 0061 5478), Associate Fellow, </F>
National Defense Science, Technology, and Industry Commission: 
"Comprehensive Nuclear Test Ban Inevitable in the Developing 
Circumstances -- Written on the Eve of Talks on a `Comprehensive 
Nuclear Test Ban Treaty'"] 
  [Excerpts] Nuclear testing is a unique yardstick for 
measuring the level and speed of nuclear weapons development. 
Non-nuclear nations have long stressed the urgency and the 
necessity for a comprehensive nuclear test ban. They firmly 
maintain that a comprehensive test ban is an important step in 
nuclear disarmament, and that it is the key to halting the 
nuclear arms race, particularly to preventing qualitative 
improvement of nuclear weapons and nuclear weapons proliferation. 
  International society has made many efforts to ban and limit 
nuclear testing during the past more than 40 years, and some 
advances have been made in negotiations to ban nuclear tests. 
  At the beginning of 1994, negotiation of a "Comprehensive 
Nuclear Test Ban Treaty" will begin at the Geneva Disarmament 
Negotiations Conference. There are two possible prospects for 
these negotiations: 1) Negotiation of a comprehensive test ban 
treaty will proceed rapidly, or 2) treaty negotiations will go 
through a tortuous and complex process because of numerous 
imponderables. [passage omitted] 
  C. Nuclear Test Ban Situation After 1990 
  During the summer session of the Geneva Disarmament 
Negotiations Conference in July 1990, a special committee on 
banning nuclear testing was founded after a seven-year hiatus. 
This was no doubt closely related to the international 
situation, particularly new changes in the international 
disarmament situation. First of all, on the nuclear disarmament 
question, the United States and the USSR prepared for a 
strategic arms reduction treaty (START) as a follow-on to the 
signing of a U.S.-Soviet "intermediate range ballistic missile 
treaty," and continuation of talks on the further reduction of 
nuclear weapons. Second, the United States and Western 
countries, which were anxious to respond to the needs of the 
fourth deliberative meeting (held in August 1990) on a "Nuclear 
Non-Proliferation Treaty," had to adopt a flexible attitude. At 
that time, France still maintained its rigid position, affirming 
anew that it would not take part in the work of the special 
nuclear test ban committee. China participated in the work of 
the special committee. It expressed willingness to understand 
the demand of non-nuclear nations for a ban on nuclear weapons, 
and it desired to take an active part in the special committee's 
work. 
  However, from 1990 until 1922, serious differences existed 
among the parties to the disarmament talks, particularly on the 
issue of whether the special committee should have negotiating 
authority. A group of 21 unaligned nations called for immediate 
negotiation of a comprehensive test ban treaty, strongly 
asserting that they could not permit a situation to continue in 
which a serious priority matter was only discussed but not 
negotiated. The United States and the United Kingdom were 
stubbornly opposed. Subsequently, the special committee 
conducted only a general discussion of the nuclear test ban 
issue. On 26 May 1992, France declared at a full meeting of the 
disarmament negotiations conference that it would participate in 
the work of the special nuclear test ban committee. 
  1993 was an unusual year. On 10 August, the Geneva 
Disarmament Conference passed a decision (Document Number: CD 
1212), granting negotiating authority to the nuclear test ban 
committee, and in early 1994, negotiation of a treaty formally 
began. At the 1993 disarmament conference, both the unaligned 
nations and non-nuclear western nations were extremely active in 
an effort to obtain complete test ban treaty negotiating rights. 
They did not want the treaty to be like "partial test ban 
treaties," the nuclear powers concocting a treaty only to use a 
disarmament talks conference as an alibi, insisting that 
discussions could be conducted only at a disarmament conference. 
<H5>  III. Nuclear Test Ban Is an Inevitability in the Developing </H5>
and Changing International Situation 
  The reality facing the world during the 1980s was a constant 
escalation of the nuclear arms race between the United States 
and the Soviet Union for more than 40 years. However, they were 
never able to break the balance of power between their strategic 
forces. Peace was substantially maintained in the world for 40 
years. Maintenance and updating of such super inflationary 
nuclear weapons during this protracted period of peace was an 
extremely heavy burden, particularly for the USSR. Changes in 
the world situation forced both the United States and the USSR 
to consider readjustment of their nuclear arms policy. The 
strategic defense initiative (SDI) that the Reagan 
administration proposed in 1983 was an effort to replace an 
offensive strategy with a defensive strategy. In March 1983, 
after Mikhail Gorbachev took office, the USSR changed from 
pursuit of great military power status to development of its 
domestic economy and enhancement of its overall national 
strength. Beginning in 1985, this readjustment of the nuclear 
arms policies of the United States and the Soviet Union brought 
about the most relaxed atmosphere in the nuclear arms field 
since the advent of nuclear weapons. Both the United States and 
the USSR began to dismantle and destroy their global 
intermediate range and intermediate short range missiles. 
Following discussions in mid-September 1987, the foreign 
ministers of the two countries issued a joint statement stating 
that "both parties unanimously agreed to begin comprehensive, 
phased" negotiations "before 1 December," the two nations first 
"agreeing on effective nuclear inspection measures." Next, they 
would "conduct negotiations in the intermediate stage on the 
issue of further limiting testing," and "the final goal is a 
complete ban on nuclear testing." Both the United States and the 
USSR also sent experts to examine each other's nuclear test 
ranges, and they conducted joint tests. 
  At the same time, the United States Government came under 
increasingly strong pressure from forces in the country opposed 
to the continuation of nuclear testing. In March 1986, 58 
members of the House of Representatives, led by the House 
majority leader, and five senators wrote a joint letter urging 
Reagan to accept the USSR's proposal for a halt to nuclear 
testing. In August of the same year, the United States House of 
Representatives again passed a resolution calling upon the 
United States Government and the USSR to negotiate the banning 
of all nuclear protests. Outside the Congress, public 
anti-nuclear demonstrations increased in intensity. During 
demonstrations and gatherings opposing nuclear testing that were 
held year after year, some demonstrators even marched on the 
Nevada test range in an effort to block nuclear testing. Faced 
with such tremendous pressure, the Reagan administration could 
only adopt a tough opposition policy. 
  Developments since the mid-1980s foretold the possibility 
that a new turning point period might occur on the nuclear test 
ban issue. 
  As the world entered the 1990s, the international situation 
changed greatly. East-west relations underwent enormous changes, 
notably the disappearance of the Warsaw Pact and the dramatic 
dissolution of the USSR. No longer did they pose a serious 
threat to the United States and West Europe. The nuclear 
strategy of the United States and its allies was commensurately 
adjusted. The United States lost its erstwhile worthy adversary, 
and the western nations headed by the United States began to 
shift their imaginary enemy to third world countries. More and 
more, the western countries emphasized that prevention of 
weapons of mass destruction, particularly the proliferation of 
nuclear weapons, was the most prominent problem in disarmament 
and arms control in the world today. They made prevention of 
proliferation the foremost strategic task, holding that such 
proliferation posed the greatest global threat to international 
security following the cold war. They also maintained that early 
conclusion of a complete test ban treaty could effectively and 
promptly prevent nuclear threshold countries (also termed 
near-nuclear countries) from crossing the nuclear threshold, 
thereby eliminating a hidden danger. This was because, generally 
speaking, near-nuclear countries had to do only a certain amount 
of nuclear testing in order to qualify to join the ranks of 
countries having nuclear weapons of value in actual warfare. 
  On the other hand, the great tide of international 
relaxation 
stimulated further demands that the United States and Russia 
make more nuclear arms cuts and ban nuclear testing. Great 
advances were also won in the international disarmament field. 
In July 1991, the United States and Russia signed the "Strategic 
Nuclear Arms Reduction Treaty" (START). On 16 June 1992, 
American President George Bush and Russian President Boris 
Yeltsin signed the "Strategic Arms Reduction Agreement of 
Understanding." According to the provisions of this treaty, the 
nuclear warheads on the nearly 10,000 strategic weapons that 
each side had deployed would be reduced by two-thirds, i.e., by 
2003, the number of nuclear warheads on strategic weapons that 
each side had deployed would be no more than between 3,000 and 
3,500. 
  As a super power, with the easing of the confrontation 
between the USSR and the United States, and the beginning of new 
changes in the European strategic pattern, the United States 
made a step-by-step readjustment of its nuclear strategy to meet 
the post-cold war international situation. After the Clinton 
administration took office, readjustment of America's national 
security strategy became increasingly evident. 
  Following the dissolution of the USSR, the United States 
unilaterally adopted various measures to prevent loss of control 
over and proliferation of the former Soviet Union's nuclear 
weapons. The United States readjusted its own nuclear force 
structure and nuclear weapons development plans. In 1992, the 
United States stopped production of new model nuclear warheads. 
On 2 July 1992, Bush announced the return to the United States 
from abroad of all land-based and sea-based tactical nuclear 
weapons that were slated for withdrawal. On 13 July, President 
Bush announced a halt to the production of weapons-grade 
plutonium and highly enriched uranium used to manufacture 
nuclear warheads. Inevitably, the United States also gradually 
readjusted its nuclear test ban policy as well. In July 1992, 
President Bush stated in his nuclear test ban policy proposal 
that in order to ensure the dependability of a U.S. nuclear 
deterrent force, appropriate and effective nuclear testing was 
necessary. However, the clamor and pressure inside the United 
States for a complete test ban was extremely strong. The United 
States Congress passed a bill on 24 September 1992 that provided 
for no further nuclear tests after 30 September 1996 unless 
other countries conduct such tests. It also provided that prior 
to 1996, the total number of underground nuclear tests could not 
exceed 15, and it required the United States to temporarily halt 
nuclear testing for nine months. 
  On 3 July 1993, the Clinton administration's new nuclear 
test 
ban policy was inaugurated. It approved earliest initiation of 
multilateral talks, and early conclusion of a comprehensive test 
ban treaty. It emphasized that the United States might conclude 
a test ban treaty in advance of the already stated 1996 date. It 
declared that the United States' temporary halt to testing would 
extend until September 1994 unless another country conducted 
tests. Actually, earliest initiation of negotiations on a 
comprehensive test ban had been jointly agreed earlier in 
discussions between the American and Russian heads of state in 
Vancouver. 
  The Clinton administration's establishment of a new nuclear 
test ban stemmed mostly from political necessity, Clinton's own 
campaign promise, and the U.S. "nonproliferation" policy. 
However, the inauguration of this new policy had a direct and 
major influence on "Comprehensive Nuclear Test Ban Treaty" 
negotiations. Opening of the curtain on this treaty's 
negotiation benefitted from it. 
  Naturally, not only has readjustment of America's nuclear 
test ban policy played a major role in bringing about the 
nuclear test ban treaty negotiations, but there have also been 
other reasons as well. 
  1. With the approach of the 1995 meeting to discuss a 
"Nuclear Non-Proliferation Treaty," loud cries from third world 
countries for a comprehensive test ban are reaching a crescendo. 
They have taken the opportunity to redouble pressures on nuclear 
nations to force them to political promises and to negotiate at 
once the conclusion of a comprehensive test ban treaty. Western 
nonnuclear nations are also actively promoting early 
negotiations. 
  2. Other nuclear countries have agreed or have been forced 
to 
agree to take part in negotiations for a comprehensive test ban 
treaty. Russia has consistently supported a comprehensive test 
ban. Not only does Russia gain political advantage from this 
position, but of greater importance today is preservation of its 
nuclear power position, and its economic predicament. Although 
it still has a need to conduct nuclear tests, the United Kingdom 
relies on America's test ranges and joint testing with the 
United States. It has no choice but to do as the United States 
says. France was virtually forced to agree to take part in the 
negotiations as a result of domestic and foreign political 
pressure. China supports early negotiations to conclude a 
"Comprehensive Nuclear Test Ban Treaty," and emphasis that all 
nuclear nations should simultaneously negotiate and conclude an 
unconditional international treaty of no first use of nuclear 
weapons, and not using or threatening to use nuclear weapons on 
non-nuclear nations and non-nuclear territories. 
  3. Some nuclear countries announcements of a temporary halt 
to nuclear tests will certainly promote progress in negotiations 
for a comprehensive test ban treaty. Mostly in response to 
international or domestic pressures, Russia, the United States, 
and France announced a temporary halt to nuclear testing. In 
October 1991, Russia announced a one-year temporary halt to 
testing, which it later extended for one year. In 1992 and 1993, 
the United States announced a temporary halt to testing. On 8 
April 1992, France also announced a temporary halt to nuclear 
testing for that year (France's action was purely a cheap 
political decision). In response, third world nations repeatedly 
called loudly for these temporary halts to testing by some 
nuclear countries to become a permanent halt to testing by all 
nuclear nations. 
<H5>  IV. Prospects for Negotiation of a "Comprehensive Nuclear </H5>
Test Ban Treaty" 
  In early 1994, talks on the "Comprehensive Nuclear Test Ban 
Treaty" will begin in the only multilateral disarmament 
organization -- the Geneva Disarmament Negotiations Conference. 
Theer are two possible prospects for these talks. 
  A. Negotiations on a Comprehensive Test Ban Treaty Will 
Be Conducted Swiftly 
  1. On the basis of the resolution that the Geneva 
Disarmament 
Negotiations Conference passed on 10 August 1993, negotiations 
on a comprehensive test ban treaty will formally begin in 
January 1994. The First Committee of the United Nations General 
Assembly (the UN First Committee) discussed and unanimously 
approved a resolution on a "Comprehensive Nuclear Test Ban 
Treaty" on 19 November 1993. This resolution urged the Geneva 
Disarmament Conference's 1994 session to regard a "Comprehensive 
Nuclear Test Ban Treaty" as a priority task and accelerate 
negotiations in order to reach a universal international 
agreement that provides for effective international nuclear 
inspections. A total of 156 nations jointly sponsored this 
resolution, an unprecedented number, which shows the high degree 
of attention that international society pays to the 
comprehensive test ban issue, and also suggests that the talks 
will be conducted with great fanfare. 
  2. Since it is limited by Congress' nuclear test ban law, 
the 
United States is anxious to complete negotiations for a 
comprehensive test ban treaty by 1996; it will apply pressure on 
other nuclear states. Russia has always advocated early 
conclusion of a comprehensive test ban treaty, so naturally it 
is actively pushing for it. To a very large extent, the attitude 
of the United Kingdom will follow that of the United States. 
  Technologically speaking, after more than nearly a half 
century of high speed development, America's and Russia's 
nuclear weapons long ago passed their peak period. No 
earth-shaking advances have been made for the past nearly 20 
years, so the need to continue nuclear testing has greatly 
decreased. Furthermore, several nuclear weapons research 
institutes in the United States have explored various approaches 
in recent years in a search for methods that can replace or 
partially replace nuclear tests, and they have made some 
progress. Without doubt, other nuclear power have conducted or 
are in process of conducting similar research. Pioneering in 
this field of technology in order to continue to maintain 
nuclear weapons security and reliability following a 
comprehensive test ban, and even being able to continue to open 
new approaches to the development of nuclear weapons, will 
provide the technical guarantees needed for the realization of a 
comprehensive test ban. 
  4. Pressures from non-nuclear states for the early 
conclusion 
of a "comprehensive nuclear test ban" treaty will increase 
steadily. Some third world countries have already demanded that 
such a treaty be concluded before 1994, and that it be linked to 
extension of the "Nuclear Non-Proliferation Treaty." Without 
doubt, this will also be a major motivation for conclusion of 
the treaty. The international anti-nuclear movement is gathering 
strength. Continuation of nuclear testing in a nuclear test ban 
atmosphere has become fraught with difficulties. 
  Sweden proposed a "Comprehensive Nuclear Test Ban Treaty": 
in 
1991, and it 1992, it proposed new amendments. Many disarmament 
talks nations have expressed support for this draft, and they 
have suggested making it the basis for treaty talks. Even the 
United States said that the Swedish text might serve as an 
important basis for talks. The text of the Swedish treaty draft 
creates favorable conditions for the formal initiation of 
disarmament talks and for accelerating treaty negotiation. 
  B. Many Imponderables Remain in the Negotiation of a 
Comprehensive Test Ban Treaty; Treaty Negotiations Will Go 
Through a Tortuous and Complex Process 
  1. As with any complex project, a comprehensive test ban 
treaty cannot be negotiated in a day. The provisions of a future 
treaty will have wide ramifications, and negotiations will 
involve numerous specifics such as the scope of the ban, the 
definition of a nuclear explosion, the laboratory simulated 
nuclear explosion issue, conditions under which the treaty takes 
effect, and the duration of the treaty, etc. The talks 
intensify, problems will become increasingly complex. Presumably 
negotiations will take some time. 
  2. The treaty's nuclear testing issue will be the key 
component of talks. Comprehensive test ban nuclear inspection 
techniques are numerous. They include mostly the following: 
seismological monitoring (used for long distance monitoring of 
underground explosions in violation of the treaty), satellite 
monitoring (used in monitoring preparations for nuclear testing 
and for atmospheric nuclear testing), on-site inspections (used 
for further inspection following discovery of suspicious things 
that violate the treaty), etc. Discussion of the treaty's 
nuclear inspection provisions involves numerous questions such 
as technical issues and costs, reasonableness, and how to 
organize execution. Once talks begin, there will be a multitude 
of matters. 
  3. The unaligned nations and the nuclear nations do not 
agree 
with each other on the starting point and the goals for 
conducting a comprehensive nuclear test ban treaty. The 
unaligned nations want to limit the nuclear nations' further 
development of nuclear weapons. They are anxious to conclude a 
treaty. However, most of the nuclear nations feel that the sole 
goal in concluding a comprehensive test ban treaty is the 
prevention of nuclear proliferation. Britain and France insist 
that any future treaty must be one that permits genuine nuclear 
inspections universally, and that no final deadline should be 
set for its conclusions. Predictably, there are major 
differences among all parties about the timetable for concluding 
treaty negotiations. 
  Among the nuclear states, France will protract the 
negotiating time because it still wants to conduct nuclear 
tests. France has long adopted an extremely hard line attitude 
about the nuclear test ban issue. It was not until 1992 that 
France agreed to take part in the work of the Geneva disarmament 
conference's special nuclear test ban committee. Although France 
began to reduce outlays for nuclear weapons development plans in 
1992 in response to changes in the international situation and 
to save money, it still wants to conduct a certain amount of 
nuclear testing. For example, it wants to use nuclear tests to 
continue to authenticate the warheads on the missiles to be 
installed on the new Le Triomphant class ballistic missile 
nuclear submarines. On 7 October 1993, the French minister of 
national defense openly stated that France would not sign a 
comprehensive test ban treaty before mastering simulated nuclear 
testing, and that France would require between 6 to 8 years to 
master this technology. This also suggests that France will play 
a role in comprehensive test ban treaty negotiations. 
  Concluding Remarks 
  Conclusion of a "Comprehensive Nuclear Test Ban Treaty" has 
been the fervent hope of international society for several 
decades. Third world countries have termed it "something that is 
extremely desirable yet most difficult to attain." Finally there 
is hope that this day will come. However, treaty negotiations 
will positively not be easy. People will have to wait and see 
what steps the Geneva Disarmament Talks Conference will take to 
advance to the final point in concluding a treaty. 

</TEXT>

</DOC>
