ID: 46	RANK: 86	SCORE: 15.8379

<DOC>
<DOCNO> FBIS4-47618 </DOCNO>
<HT>    "cr00000026694001" </HT>


<HEADER>
<DATE1>   12 May 1994 </DATE1>
FBIS 
DUE TO COPYRIGHT OR OTHER RESTRICTIONS THE FOLLOWING 
ITEM IS INTENDED FOR USE ONLY BY U.S. GOVERNMENT 
CONSUMERS. IT IS BASED ON FOREIGN MEDIA CONTENT AND 
BEHAVIOR AND IS ISSUED WITHOUT COORDINATION WITH OTHER 
U.S. GOVERNMENT COMPONENTS. 
FBIS TRENDS-11MAY94-CHINA 
<H3> <TI>      China-Central Asia-Mongolia </TI></H3>

</HEADER>

<HT><F P=107><PHRASE>       China-Central Asia-Mongolia </PHRASE></F></HT>


<TEXT>
PRC      Premier's Central Asian Tour Promotes Expanded Ties 
                              SUMMARY 
   PRC Premier Li Peng's recent official visits to Mongolia and to 
the Republics of Uzbekistan, Turkmenistan, Kyrgyzstan, and 
Kazakhstan have served to underscore China's deepening ties with 
its neighbors in Central Asia.  At the same time, Beijing used 
the visit to reassure those neighbors and Russia of its peaceful 
intentions in the region.  Beijing may also hope that growing 
ties with these countries may help to limit the reemergence of 
Russian influence. 
                             END SUMMARY 
   Li Peng's 18-28 April tour of the four Central Asian republics 
was highlighted by a further expansion of China's bilateral 
economic relations with Uzbekistan, Turkmenistan, Kyrgyzstan, and 
Kazakhstan.  The 18-20 April stop in Uzbekistan, for example, was 
capped by the signing of four bilateral accords, including an 
agreement on a Chinese loan to the Uzbekistan Government and a 
pact on civil aviation (Xinhua, 19 April).  Three agreements--one 
covering a 50 million yuan PRC loan to the Turkmenistan 
Government, a protocol on regular consultations between the 
foreign ministries of the two countries, and notes on a Chinese 
grant of goods--were signed during Li's 20-22 April stay in 
Turkmenistan (Xinhua, ITAR-TASS, 22 April).  The signing of five 
intergovernmental agreements, including an accord on PRC loans to 
Kyrgyzstan and one on cultural cooperation, marked Li's 22-25 
April stay in Bishkek (Xinhua, 24 April), while three accords 
were signed during his 25-28 April visit to Kazakhstan.  Most 
notable among the economic documents signed in Kazakhstan was a 
"summary" of talks on developing railway transportation (Xinhua, 
28 April). 
   China's economic ties with the four Central Asian republics were 
also given a boost by the inclusion in the official Chinese 
Government delegation--" for the first time" according to a 13 
April Xinhua report--of a "delegation of leading Chinese business 
executives."  The delegation, which was headed by Zheng Hongyi, 
president of the China Council for the Promotion of International 
Trade (CCPIT), and made up of executives from the China National 
Construction Corporation, China National Petroleum Corporation, 
China National Textile Import and Export Corporation, and an iron 
and steel industrial and trade group, reportedly signed a number 
of contracts and letters of intent throughout the trip.  In 
Kyrgyzstan, for example, Xinhua reported that the CCPIT signed an 
accord with the Kyrgyzstan Chamber of Industry and Commerce on 
"developing cooperative ties," while representatives from the 
Textile Import and Export Corporation signed a contract to buy 
30,000 tons of chemical fertilizer (24 April).  Siniilarly in 
Ashgabat, China's National Petroleum Corporation signed a letter 
of intent with the Ministry of Oil and Gas of Turkmenistan on 
joint cooperation in developing the two countries' oil and gas 
sectors, while a Chinese trade and industry group signed a letter 
of intent with the Turkmenistan "Kuvvat" state power technology 
corporation to build an iron and steel works to process scrap 
metal and an aluminum production works (ITAR-TASS, 22 April). 
   Caution on Economic Ties 
   Although Chinese reporting indicates that Li and his Central 
Asian counterparts reaffirmed their desire to expand economic 
ties, Li's remarks to Kazakhstani entrepreneurs on 26 April 
suggests that Beijing will take a cautious approach to developing 
closer relations (Xinhua, 26,27 April).  Outlining China's 
guidelines for "developing economic cooperation and trade" with 
Central Asia, Li said that such cooperative efforts should be 
based not only on "equality" but also on "mutual benefit."  He 
stressed that "both sides" must benefit from the development of 
bilateral ties and that the "principle of exchanges at equal 
value" must be followed.  He also pointed out that any joint 
ventures must be evaluated on the basis of "market prospect and 
market demand" and that enterprises must focus on "taking 
advantage" of local resources to enable them to bring in "good 
economic returns with competitive products." 
   Li also used the occasion of his 26 April speech to warn the 
Central Asian republics that China will not fill the resource 
void in their economies left by the breakup of the former Soviet 
Union.  He pointed out that as a "developing" country itself 
China can only provide a "very small amount" of economic 
assistance as a "symbol of its friendship." 
   Resolving Border Issues 
   In addition to deepening economic ties with Central Asia, Li's 
visit showed new progress in resolving China's outstanding border 
problems with Kazakhstan and Kyrgyzstan.  Fulfilling a pledge 
made during Kazakhstani President Nursultan Nazarbayev's October 
1993 visit to China, Li and Nazarbayev signed a border agreement 
on 26 April.  According to a Xinhua report, Li described the new 
agreement as a "historic document" which "defines" the Sino- 
Kazakhstani border in a "legal form" (26 April).  With the 
signing of the agreement Kazakhstan becomes the first of the four 
former Soviet republics--including Russia, Tajikistan, and 
Kyrgyzstan--to resolve its border differences with Beijing (ITAR- 
TASS, 27 April). 
   Beijing also appears to have made some progress in overcoming its 
border differences with Kyrgyzstan during Li's visit.  According 
to a 23 April Xinhua account of their talks that day, Li and 
Kyrgyzstan President Askar Akayev "unanimously" agreed on the 
need to "expeditiously" turn "previously concluded" agreements 
into a "legal" document.  While noting that "some" issues remain, 
the two leaders reportedly said that "friendly negotiations" will 
continue, expressing the belief that the border issue will be 
resolved in the "not-too-distant future." 
   Reassurances on China's Regional Role 
   Chinese media reporting on Li's four-nation tour indicates that 
the PRC premier also used his visit to reassure the four Central 
Asian republics and Russia about Beijing's intentions in the 
region.  Laying out four principles for Sino-Central Asian 
relations in a speech to the Uzbekistan parliament on 19 April, 
Li reiterated China's standard foreign policy line underscoring 
China's desire for a "stable and peaceful" environment and 
renouncing any "hegemonistic" intent (Xinhua, 19 April; Renmin 
Ribao, 20 April).  China, he asserted, "seeks no self-interest or 
sphere of influence in the world, including this region," and 
will "always" maintain "equal and friendly" relations with its 
neighbors.  He went on to affirm that China will "respect" the 
"independent choice" of the Central Asian peoples and will "never 
interfere" in their internal affairs. 
   In his speech to the Uzbekistan parliament, Li also took 
particular pains to reassure Moscow of Beijing's peaceful 
intentions in the region.  Pointing to the need for "regional 
stability," Li said that China's relations with the Central Asian 
republics are "not directed against any third country." 
Indicating that Beijing sees a continued role for Moscow in the 
region, Li went on to say that China is "willing" to see all the 
countries in the region live "in harmony" with each other. 
Returning to these themes during his visit to Kazakhstan, Li told 
the group of Kazakhstani entrepreneurs that China "seeks no 
sphere of economic or political influence" in the region and is 
willing to participate in "equal and fair competition" with other 
countries desiring to invest and trade there.  Underscoring 
Beijing's peaceful intentions a day later at a press conference 
in Almaty, Li said that China has "no interest" in filling the 
"so-called vacuum" left by the breakup of the former Soviet Union 
(Xinhua, 27 April). 
   Nuclear and Ethnic Minority Issues 
   Li also used his stay in Almaty to address the sensitive issues 
of Kazakhstani concerns about China's nuclear testing program and 
China's concern over unrest among its Muslim minorities.  Stating 
China's longstanding position on nuclear testing at his press 
conference on 27 April, Li pointed out that China has the 
"smallest" number of nuclear weapons of the nuclear states and 
has pledged not to be the first to use such weapons.  He went on 
to reiterate Beijing's support for a "complete prohibition and 
thorough destruction of nuclear weapons" and for the realization 
of a "complete nuclear test ban in such a context" (Xinhua, ITAR- 
TASS, 27 April).  In return, Li appears to have received 
Nazarbayev's reassurances that Almaty will not allow its 
minorities, "elements of 'East Turkistan' to undertake activities 
against China from Kazakhstan to the detriment of Sino- 
Kazakhstani relations" (Xinhua, ITAR-TASS, 27 April). 
   Consolidating Relations With Mongolia 
   Reflecting the deepening ties between the two countries, Beijing 
and Ulaanbaatar used Li's 28-29 April visit--the first by a 
Chinese head of government since 1960--to put their bilateral 
relationship on a new footing, signing a treaty of "friendship 
and cooperation" to replace the treaty of "friendship and mutual 
assistance" signed in 1960.  The treaty, Li said, will provide a 
"new political basis" for the future development of relations and 
will be the "basic principle" for "standardizing" the handling of 
bilateral ties (Xinhua, 29 April).  According to the text carried 
by Xinhua, the treaty calls for the development of 
"goodneighborly and cooperative" relations on the basis of the 
five principles of peaceful coexistence, regular bilateral 
consultations, and the "steady development of equal and 
reciprocal cooperation on a long-term basis" in a number of 
areas, including trade, culture, education, science and 
technology, and environmental protection (29 April).  Reflecting 
the changed world situation, the new treaty contains no reference 
to "proletarian internationalism" as a basis for Sino-Mongolian 
relations and no longer calls for relations of "mutual 
assistance" between the two countries. 
   At the same time, Chinese concerns about Russian intentions were 
evident in the treaty.  Suggesting that Beijing is trying to 
guard against the possible reemergence of Russian influence, the 
treaty  said that "neither party shall join any military or 
political alliances targeted against the other or sign with any 
third country any treaties that infringe on the other side's 
sovereignty and security" or permit a "third country" to use its 
territory to "hurt the other side's sovereignty and security." 
   As he had during his previous stops, Li offered assurances to 
Mongolian Premier Puntsagiyn Jasray about Beijing's peaceful 
intentions in their talks on 29 April.  According to a Xinhua 
report that day, Li told Jasray that in developing relations with 
Mongolia, China will "respect Mongolia's independence, 
sovereignty, and territorial integrity" as well as the Mongolian 
people's "choice of their own path of development."  Li went on 
to express China's "appreciation and support" for Mongolia's 
determination to become a nuclear-free zone and the PRC's 
"willingness" to see Mongolia develop "friendly relations" with 
other countries. 
   Like the other stops on his Central Asian tour, Li's visit to 
Mongolia was capped by the signing of a number of economic 
agreements.  In addition to an accord on cultural, economic, and 
technological cooperation, Xinhua on 29 April reported that the 
two sides signed agreements on the "protection and utilization" 
of water in the border areas, on cooperation in the quarantine of 
animals and veterinary work, on guaranteeing the quality of 
imports and exports, and on the provision of Chinese aid to 
Mongolia. 
   Prospects 
   Driven by its desire for a stable international environment in 
which to pursue its modernization drive, Beijing is likely to 
continue to carefully nurture its relations with Uzbekistan, 
Turkmenistan, Kyrgyzstan, Kazakhstan, and Mongolia.  Judging by 
reporting on the visit, Beijing will soon resolve its border 
differences with Kyrgyzstan.  Moreover, as bilateral economic 
relations between China and each of the five countries grow each 
country will have an increasing stake in preserving those ties 
and minimizing any friction.  China may also hope that by 
strengthening trade ties and bilateral relations in general with 
these countries, it can broaden Beijing's influence in the region 
at Russia's expense. 
   (AUTHOR:  HEBBEL.  QUESTIONS AND/OR COMMENTS, PLEASE CALL CHIEF, 
CHINA ANALYSIS TEAM, (703) 733-6097.) 
EAG/HEIPLE/ta 11/1436z may 

</TEXT>

</DOC>
