ID: 68	RANK: 57	SCORE: 5.5203

<DOC>
<DOCNO> FBIS4-54810 </DOCNO>
<HT>    "dreeu087_r_94003" </HT>


<HEADER>
<AU>   FBIS-EEU-94-087 </AU>
Daily Report 
<DATE1>  22 Mar 1994 </DATE1>

</HEADER>

<F P=100> ROMANIA </F>
<H3> <TI>   Editorial on PDSR's `Transylvanian Offensive' </TI></H3>
<HT><F P=107><PHRASE>    Editorial on PDSR's `Transylvanian Offensive' </PHRASE></F></HT>

<F P=102>   94CH0215A Bucharest ROMANIAI MAGYAR SZO in Hungarian 22 Mar 
94 p 1 </F>

<F P=103> 94CH0215A </F>
<F P=104>  Bucharest ROMANIAI MAGYAR SZO </F>
<F P=105>  Hungarian </F>


<TEXT>
CSO 

<F P=106> [Editorial by Janos Gyarmath under the "We Cannot Leave This </F>
Without Commentary" rubric: "Transylvanian Offensive"] 
  [Text] The ambitious Adrian Nastase and the governing party 
thinks that the time has come to obliterate, or attempt to 
obliterate, the weak election results of the Social Democracy 
Party (of Romania) [RSZDP] in Transylvania. As we recall, in 
spite of all his efforts, Ion Iliescu and his troupe did not 
succeed at the time in "building a nest" in Transylvania, in the 
municipalities of which the votes were acquired by the two 
opposing regional parties, the Romanian National Unity Party 
[RNEP] and the Democratic Union of Hungarians in Romania 
[RMDSZ], as well as by the Democratic Convention of Romania 
[RDK] which was supported by the latter. This fact might lead 
one to conclude that the election program of the SZDP did not 
capture the sympathy of Transylvanians, for two simple reasons. 
On the one hand, its economic policy did not promise the changes 
for the towns and villages which Transylvanians expected after 
the change of regime in 1989, and on the other hand, the 
national strategy proved to be opportunist, because it did not 
satisfy extremist Romanian movements, the Romanian Hearth [Vatra 
Romaneasca], but neither did it present a modern program, 
befitting the spirit of Europe, which could have appealed to the 
moderate elements, or to the Hungarians. Thus, in the tense 
atmosphere following the events of Marosvasarhely [Tirgu Mures], 
essentially with the powerful help of the governing party, 
nationalism and xenophobia gained ground in Transylvania, 
accompanied by the rise of the RNEP and "Funarism." At the same 
time, all the people who were disappointed in the Front(s) 
showed their support for the RDK, so that the Hungarians, who 
became relatively isolated, would unequivocally vote for the 
RMDSZ. 
  One cannot grasp exactly what is more annoying for the SZDP, 
which has a virtual monopoly in the other historical provinces 
and especially in the countryside--whether that the RNEP lured a 
great number of Romanians from it or rather that by now, in 
three rounds of voting, the Hungarians ended up on the other 
side, on that of the RDK? Perhaps both. Of course not to the 
same degree. Whereas the SZDP has been cooperating, at least in 
Parliament, with the RNEP for two years, in spite of all 
irritations and partnerial unruliness, the RDK and the RMDSZ, 
which delivers votes to it, are indisputably on the other side, 
that is to say, in the opposition. 
  However, it seems that the balance of power is shifting in 
Transylvania. It seems that because of its extremist and 
demagogue program, because of Mayor Funar's unruliness and its 
ties to Caritas, the RNEP is losing speed and at the same time 
ground. But in whose favor? Not necessarily in favor of the 
governing party, with which not only the Hungarians but also the 
Romanian population of the province are more and more 
dissatisfied. Thus, an early election would favor the RDK, the 
parties of which could lately be labeled less and less "henchmen 
of the Hungarians" because they hardly ever stand up to 
accusations against the RMDSZ, or for the party's legitimate 
demands.... 
  In other words, one must make a move, Adrian Nastase 
decided. 
And he made a move. Moreover, he did so on Saturday, in Cluj, in 
the "nest" of the RNEP, where he convened a regional meeting and 
sketched the direction and strategy of his Transylvanian 
offensive before 16 SZDP chairmen and prefects from Transylvania 
and Bansag. This signals that on the one hand, the governing 
party would like to fill the void left by the decline of the 
RNEP, and on the other hand, somehow curtail the RMDSZ, namely 
by "alienating" several organizations of Hungarians from it. In 
other words, if up to now his purpose was to drive a wedge 
between the RDK and the RMDSZ, to isolate the latter, and to 
strip it from its allies, then from now on he wants more. With a 
somewhat modified national policy, he wants to decrease the 
political influence of the organizations that safeguard the 
interests of Hungarians and to demonstrate that the majority of 
the Hungarian population does not follow the "extremists" of the 
RMDSZ and does not want any kind of autonomy; that is, having 
lost its patience and having resigned itself to everyday 
problems, it would be satisfied with much less. This is the 
source of the praise for the RMDSZ but also of the serious 
accusations that it conducts ambiguous politics and that some of 
its leaders are accomplices of the Budapest power structure.... 
  One cannot leave without commentary Adrian Nastase's 
"political science" analysis and the intentions of the SZDP. One 
must take his ideas seriously. After all, what he planned is a 
challenge, a challenge to a "game of chess" which it would be a 
sin to begin unprepared. Thus, it would be good to set aside for 
a while internal disputes, and put out heads together, so that 
in this game, which promises to be serious, there would be no 
gaps left, even by accident, in the unprotected defense lines of 
the RMDSZ.... 

</TEXT>

</DOC>
